A Hierarchical Process Execution Support for Grid
Computing
Fábio R. L. Cicerre
Institute of Computing
State University of Campinas
Campinas, Brazil
fcicerre@ic.unicamp.br
Edmundo R. M. Madeira
Institute of Computing
State University of Campinas
Campinas, Brazil
edmundo@ic.unicamp.br
Luiz E. Buzato
Institute of Computing
State University of Campinas
Campinas, Brazil
buzato@ic.unicamp.br
ABSTRACT
Grid is an emerging infrastructure used to share resources
among virtual organizations in a seamless manner and to
provide breakthrough computing power at low cost. 
Nowadays there are dozens of academic and commercial products
that allow execution of isolated tasks on grids, but few 
products support the enactment of long-running processes in a
distributed fashion. In order to address such subject, this
paper presents a programming model and an infrastructure
that hierarchically schedules process activities using 
available nodes in a wide grid environment. Their advantages
are automatic and structured distribution of activities and
easy process monitoring and steering.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
C.2.4 [Computer-Communication Networks]: Distributed
Systems-distributed applications
General Terms
Design, Performance, Management, Algorithms
1. INTRODUCTION
Grid computing is a model for wide-area distributed and
parallel computing across heterogeneous networks in 
multiple administrative domains. This research field aims to 
promote sharing of resources and provides breakthrough 
computing power over this wide network of virtual 
organizations in a seamless manner [8]. Traditionally, as in Globus
[6], Condor-G [9] and Legion [10], there is a minimal 
infrastructure that provides data resource sharing, computational
resource utilization management, and distributed execution.
Specifically, considering distributed execution, most of the
existing grid infrastructures supports execution of isolated
tasks, but they do not consider their task interdependencies
as in processes (workflows) [12]. This deficiency restricts
better scheduling algorithms, distributed execution 
coordination and automatic execution recovery.
There are few proposed middleware infrastructures that
support process execution over the grid. In general, they
model processes by interconnecting their activities through
control and data dependencies. Among them, WebFlow
[1] emphasizes an architecture to construct distributed 
processes; Opera-G [3] provides execution recovering and 
steering, GridFlow [5] focuses on improved scheduling algorithms
that take advantage of activity dependencies, and SwinDew
[13] supports totally distributed execution on peer-to-peer
networks. However, such infrastructures contain 
scheduling algorithms that are centralized by process [1, 3, 5], or
completely distributed, but difficult to monitor and control
[13].
In order to address such constraints, this paper proposes a
structured programming model for process description and a
hierarchical process execution infrastructure. The 
programming model employs structured control flow to promote 
controlled and contextualized activity execution. 
Complementary, the support infrastructure, which executes a process
specification, takes advantage of the hierarchical structure
of a specified process in order to distribute and schedule
strong dependent activities as a unit, allowing a better 
execution performance and fault-tolerance and providing 
localized communication.
The programming model and the support infrastructure,
named X avantes, are under implementation in order to show
the feasibility of the proposed model and to demonstrate its
two major advantages: to promote widely distributed 
process execution and scheduling, but in a controlled, 
structured and localized way.
Next Section describes the programming model, and 
Section 3, the support infrastructure for the proposed grid 
computing model. Section 4 demonstrates how the support
infrastructure executes processes and distributes activities.
Related works are presented and compared to the proposed
model in Section 5. The last Section concludes this paper
encompassing the advantages of the proposed hierarchical
process execution support for the grid computing area and
lists some future works.
87 Middleware 2004 Companion
ProcessElement
Process Activity Controller
1
*
1
*
Figure 1: High-level framework of the programming
model
2. PROGRAMMING MODEL
The programming model designed for the grid computing
architecture is very similar to the specified to the Business
Process Execution Language (BPEL) [2]. Both describe 
processes in XML [4] documents, but the former specifies 
processes strictly synchronous and structured, and has more
constructs for structured parallel control. The rationale 
behind of its design is the possibility of hierarchically distribute
the process control and coordination based on structured
constructs, differently from BPEL, which does not allow 
hierarchical composition of processes.
In the proposed programming model, a process is a set of
interdependent activities arranged to solve a certain 
problem. In detail, a process is composed of activities, 
subprocesses, and controllers (see Figure 1). Activities represent
simple tasks that are executed on behalf of a process; 
subprocesses are processes executed in the context of a 
parent process; and controllers are control elements used to
specify the execution order of these activities and 
subprocesses. Like structured languages, controllers can be nested
and then determine the execution order of other controllers.
Data are exchanged among process elements through 
parameters. They are passed by value, in case of simple 
objects, or by reference, if they are remote objects shared
among elements of the same controller or process. External
data can be accessed through data sources, such as relational
databases or distributed objects.
2.1 Controllers
Controllers are structured control constructs used to 
define the control flow of processes. There are sequential and
parallel controllers.
The sequential controller types are: block, switch, for
and while. The block controller is a simple sequential 
construct, and the others mimic equivalent structured 
programming language constructs. Similarly, the parallel types are:
par, parswitch, parfor and parwhile. They extend the 
respective sequential counterparts to allow parallel execution
of process elements.
All parallel controller types fork the execution of one or
more process elements, and then, wait for each execution to
finish. Indeed, they contain a fork and a join of execution.
Aiming to implement a conditional join, all parallel 
controller types contain an exit condition, evaluated all time
that an element execution finishes, in order to determine
when the controller must end.
The parfor and parwhile are the iterative versions of
the parallel controller types. Both fork executions while
the iteration condition is true. This provides flexibility to
determine, at run-time, the number of process elements to
execute simultaneously.
When compared to workflow languages, the parallel 
controller types represent structured versions of the workflow
control constructors, because they can nest other controllers
and also can express fixed and conditional forks and joins,
present in such languages.
2.2 Process Example
This section presents an example of a prime number search
application that receives a certain range of integers and 
returns a set of primes contained in this range. The whole
computation is made by a process, which uses a parallel
controller to start and dispatch several concurrent activities
of the same type, in order to find prime numbers. The 
portion of the XML document that describes the process and
activity types is shown below.
<PROCESS_TYPE NAME="FindPrimes">
<IN_PARAMETER TYPE="int" NAME="min"/>
<IN_PARAMETER TYPE="int" NAME="max"/>
<IN_PARAMETER TYPE="int" NAME="numPrimes"/>
<IN_PARAMETER TYPE="int" NAME="numActs"/>
<BODY>
<PRE_CODE>
setPrimes(new RemoteHashSet());
parfor.setMin(getMin());
parfor.setMax(getMax());
parfor.setNumPrimes(getNumPrimes());
parfor.setNumActs(getNumActs());
parfor.setPrimes(getPrimes());
parfor.setCounterBegin(0);
parfor.setCounterEnd(getNumActs()-1);
</PRE_CODE>
<PARFOR NAME="parfor">
<IN_PARAMETER TYPE="int" NAME="min"/>
<IN_PARAMETER TYPE="int" NAME="max"/>
<IN_PARAMETER TYPE="int" NAME="numPrimes"/>
<IN_PARAMETER TYPE="int" NAME="numActs"/>
<IN_PARAMETER
TYPE="RemoteCollection" NAME="primes"/>
<ITERATE>
<PRE_CODE>
int range=
(getMax()-getMin()+1)/getNumActs();
int minNum = range*getCounter()+getMin();
int maxNum = minNum+range-1;
if (getCounter() == getNumActs()-1)
maxNum = getMax();
findPrimes.setMin(minNum);
findPrimes.setMax(maxNum);
findPrimes.setNumPrimes(getNumPrimes());
findPrimes.setPrimes(getPrimes());
</PRE_CODE>
<ACTIVITY
TYPE="FindPrimes" NAME="findPrimes"/>
</ITERATE>
</PARFOR>
</BODY>
<OUT_PARAMETER
TYPE="RemoteCollection" NAME="primes"/>
</PROCESS_TYPE>
Middleware for Grid Computing 88
<ACTIVITY_TYPE NAME="FindPrimes">
<IN_PARAMETER TYPE="int" NAME="min"/>
<IN_PARAMETER TYPE="int" NAME="max"/>
<IN_PARAMETER TYPE="int" NAME="numPrimes"/>
<IN_PARAMETER
TYPE="RemoteCollection" NAME="primes"/>
<CODE>
for (int num=getMin(); num<=getMax(); num++) {
// stop, required number of primes was found
if (primes.size() >= getNumPrimes())
break;
boolean prime = true;
for (int i=2; i<num; i++) {
if (num % i == 0) {
prime = false;
break;
}
}
if (prime) {
primes.add(new Integer(num));
}
}
</CODE>
</ACTIVITY_TYPE>
Firstly, a process type that finds prime numbers, named
FindPrimes, is defined. It receives, through its input 
parameters, a range of integers in which prime numbers have
to be found, the number of primes to be returned, and the
number of activities to be executed in order to perform this
work. At the end, the found prime numbers are returned as
a collection through its output parameter.
This process contains a PARFOR controller aiming to 
execute a determined number of parallel activities. It iterates
from 0 to getNumActs() - 1, which determines the number
of activities, starting a parallel activity in each iteration. In
such case, the controller divides the whole range of numbers
in subranges of the same size, and, in each iteration, starts a
parallel activity that finds prime numbers in a specific 
subrange. These activities receive a shared object by reference
in order to store the prime numbers just found and control
if the required number of primes has been reached.
Finally, it is defined the activity type, FindPrimes, used
to find prime numbers in each subrange. It receives, through
its input parameters, the range of numbers in which it has
to find prime numbers, the total number of prime numbers
to be found by the whole process, and, passed by reference,
a collection object to store the found prime numbers. 
Between its CODE markers, there is a simple code to find prime
numbers, which iterates over the specified range and 
verifies if the current integer is a prime. Additionally, in each
iteration, the code verifies if the required number of primes,
inserted in the primes collection by all concurrent activities,
has been reached, and exits if true.
The advantage of using controllers is the possibility of the
support infrastructure determines the point of execution the
process is in, allowing automatic recovery and monitoring,
and also the capability of instantiating and dispatching 
process elements only when there are enough computing 
resources available, reducing unnecessary overhead. Besides,
due to its structured nature, they can be easily composed
and the support infrastructure can take advantage of this
in order to distribute hierarchically the nested controllers to
Group Server
Group
Java Virtual Machine
RMI JDBC
Group Manager
Process Server
Java Virtual Machine
RMI JDBC
Process Coordinator
Worker
Java Virtual Machine
RMI
Activity Manager
Repository
Figure 2: Infrastructure architecture
different machines over the grid, allowing enhanced 
scalability and fault-tolerance.
3. SUPPORT INFRASTRUCTURE
The support infrastructure comprises tools for 
specification, and services for execution and monitoring of 
structured processes in highly distributed, heterogeneous and 
autonomous grid environments. It has services to monitor
availability of resources in the grid, to interpret processes
and schedule activities and controllers, and to execute 
activities.
3.1 Infrastructure Architecture
The support infrastructure architecture is composed of
groups of machines and data repositories, which preserves
its administrative autonomy. Generally, localized machines
and repositories, such as in local networks or clusters, form
a group. Each machine in a group must have a Java Virtual
Machine (JVM) [11], and a Java Runtime Library, besides
a combination of the following grid support services: group
manager (GM), process coordinator (PC) and activity 
manager (AM). This combination determines what kind of group
node it represents: a group server, a process server, or 
simply a worker (see Figure 2).
In a group there are one or more group managers, but
only one acts as primary and the others, as replicas. They
are responsible to maintain availability information of group
machines. Moreover, group managers maintain references to
data resources of the group. They use group repositories to
persist and recover the location of nodes and their 
availability.
To control process execution, there are one or more 
process coordinators per group. They are responsible to 
instantiate and execute processes and controllers, select resources,
and schedule and dispatch activities to workers. In order
to persist and recover process execution and data, and also
load process specification, they use group repositories.
Finally, in several group nodes there is an activity 
manager. It is responsible to execute activities in the hosted
machine on behalf of the group process coordinators, and to
inform the current availability of the associated machine to
group managers. They also have pendent activity queues,
containing activities to be executed.
3.2 Inter-group Relationships
In order to model real grid architecture, the infrastructure
must comprise several, potentially all, local networks, like
Internet does. Aiming to satisfy this intent, local groups are
89 Middleware 2004 Companion
GM
GM
GM
GM
Figure 3: Inter-group relationships
connected to others, directly or indirectly, through its group
managers (see Figure 3).
Each group manager deals with requests of its group 
(represented by dashed ellipses), in order to register local 
machines and maintain correspondent availability. 
Additionally, group managers communicate to group managers of
other groups. Each group manager exports coarse 
availability information to group managers of adjacent groups and
also receives requests from other external services to 
furnish detailed availability information. In this way, if there
are resources available in external groups, it is possible to
send processes, controllers and activities to these groups in
order to execute them in external process coordinators and
activity managers, respectively.
4. PROCESS EXECUTION
In the proposed grid architecture, a process is specified
in XML, using controllers to determine control flow; 
referencing other processes and activities; and passing objects to
their parameters in order to define data flow. After specified,
the process is compiled in a set of classes, which represent
specific process, activity and controller types. At this time,
it can be instantiated and executed by a process coordinator.
4.1 Dynamic Model
To execute a specified process, it must be instantiated by
referencing its type on a process coordinator service of a
specific group. Also, the initial parameters must be passed
to it, and then it can be started.
The process coordinator carries out the process by 
executing the process elements included in its body sequentially.
If the element is a process or a controller, the process 
coordinator can choose to execute it in the same machine or to
pass it to another process coordinator in a remote machine,
if available. Else, if the element is an activity, it passes to
an activity manager of an available machine.
Process coordinators request the local group manager to
find available machines that contain the required service,
process coordinator or activity manager, in order to 
execute a process element. Then, it can return a local 
machine, a machine in another group or none, depending on
the availability of such resource in the grid. It returns an
external worker (activity manager machine) if there are no
available workers in the local group; and, it returns an 
external process server (process coordinator machine), if there
are no available process servers or workers in the local group.
Obeying this rule, group managers try to find process servers
in the same group of the available workers.
Such procedure is followed recursively by all process 
coGM
FindPrimes
Activity
AM
FindPrimes
Activity
AM
FindPrimes
Activity
AM
FindPrimes
Process
PC
Figure 4: FindPrimes process execution
ordinators that execute subprocesses or controllers of a 
process. Therefore, because processes are structured by 
nesting process elements, the process execution is automatically
distributed hierarchically through one or more grid groups
according to the availability and locality of computing 
resources.
The advantage of this distribution model is wide area 
execution, which takes advantage of potentially all grid 
resources; and localized communication of process elements,
because strong dependent elements, which are under the
same controller, are placed in the same or near groups. 
Besides, it supports easy monitoring and steering, due to its
structured controllers, which maintain state and control over
its inner elements.
4.2 Process Execution Example
Revisiting the example shown in Section 2.2, a process
type is specified to find prime numbers in a certain range of
numbers. In order to solve this problem, it creates a number
of activities using the parfor controller. Each activity, then,
finds primes in a determined part of the range of numbers.
Figure 4 shows an instance of this process type executing
over the proposed infrastructure. A FindPrimes process 
instance is created in an available process coordinator (PC),
which begins executing the parfor controller. In each 
iteration of this controller, the process coordinator requests
to the group manager (GM) an available activity manager
(AM) in order to execute a new instance of the FindPrimes
activity. If there is any AM available in this group or in an
external one, the process coordinator sends the activity class
and initial parameters to this activity manager and requests
its execution. Else, if no activity manager is available, then
the controller enters in a wait state until an activity manager
is made available, or is created.
In parallel, whenever an activity finishes, its result is sent
back to the process coordinator, which records it in the
parfor controller. Then, the controller waits until all 
activities that have been started are finished, and it ends. At
this point, the process coordinator verifies that there is no
other process element to execute and finishes the process.
5. RELATED WORK
There are several academic and commercial products that
promise to support grid computing, aiming to provide 
interfaces, protocols and services to leverage the use of widely
Middleware for Grid Computing 90
distributed resources in heterogeneous and autonomous 
networks. Among them, Globus [6], Condor-G [9] and Legion
[10] are widely known. Aiming to standardize interfaces
and services to grid, the Open Grid Services Architecture
(OGSA) [7] has been defined.
The grid architectures generally have services that 
manage computing resources and distribute the execution of 
independent tasks on available ones. However, emerging 
architectures maintain task dependencies and automatically
execute tasks in a correct order. They take advantage of
these dependencies to provide automatic recovery, and 
better distribution and scheduling algorithms.
Following such model, WebFlow [1] is a process 
specification tool and execution environment constructed over
CORBA that allows graphical composition of activities and
their distributed execution in a grid environment. Opera-G
[3], like WebFlow, uses a process specification language 
similar to the data flow diagram and workflow languages, but
furnishes automatic execution recovery and limited steering
of process execution.
The previously referred architectures and others that 
enact processes over the grid have a centralized coordination.
In order to surpass this limitation, systems like SwinDew [13]
proposed a widely distributed process execution, in which
each node knows where to execute the next activity or join
activities in a peer-to-peer environment.
In the specific area of activity distribution and scheduling,
emphasized in this work, GridFlow [5] is remarkable. It uses
a two-level scheduling: global and local. In the local level,
it has services that predict computing resource utilization
and activity duration. Based on this information, GridFlow
employs a PERT-like technique that tries to forecast the
activity execution start time and duration in order to better
schedule them to the available resources.
The architecture proposed in this paper, which 
encompasses a programming model and an execution support 
infrastructure, is widely decentralized, differently from WebFlow
and Opera-G, being more scalable and fault-tolerant. But,
like the latter, it is designed to support execution recovery.
Comparing to SwinDew, the proposed architecture 
contains widely distributed process coordinators, which 
coordinate processes or parts of them, differently from SwinDew
where each node has a limited view of the process: only the
activity that starts next. This makes easier to monitor and
control processes.
Finally, the support infrastructure breaks the process and
its subprocesses for grid execution, allowing a group to 
require another group for the coordination and execution of
process elements on behalf of the first one. This is 
different from GridFlow, which can execute a process in at most
two levels, having the global level as the only responsible to
schedule subprocesses in other groups. This can limit the
overall performance of processes, and make the system less
scalable.
6. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Grid computing is an emerging research field that intends
to promote distributed and parallel computing over the wide
area network of heterogeneous and autonomous 
administrative domains in a seamless way, similar to what Internet
does to the data sharing. There are several products that
support execution of independent tasks over grid, but only a
few supports the execution of processes with interdependent
tasks.
In order to address such subject, this paper proposes a
programming model and a support infrastructure that 
allow the execution of structured processes in a widely 
distributed and hierarchical manner. This support 
infrastructure provides automatic, structured and recursive 
distribution of process elements over groups of available machines;
better resource use, due to its on demand creation of 
process elements; easy process monitoring and steering, due to
its structured nature; and localized communication among
strong dependent process elements, which are placed under
the same controller. These features contribute to better 
scalability, fault-tolerance and control for processes execution
over the grid. Moreover, it opens doors for better scheduling
algorithms, recovery mechanisms, and also, dynamic 
modification schemes.
The next work will be the implementation of a recovery
mechanism that uses the execution and data state of 
processes and controllers to recover process execution. After
that, it is desirable to advance the scheduling algorithm to
forecast machine use in the same or other groups and to
foresee start time of process elements, in order to use this
information to pre-allocate resources and, then, obtain a
better process execution performance. Finally, it is 
interesting to investigate schemes of dynamic modification of 
processes over the grid, in order to evolve and adapt long-term
processes to the continuously changing grid environment.
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Paulo C. Oliveira, from the State
Treasury Department of Sao Paulo, for its deeply revision
and insightful comments.
8. REFERENCES
[1] E. Akarsu, G. C. Fox, W. Furmanski, and T. Haupt.
WebFlow: High-Level Programming Environment and
Visual Authoring Toolkit for High Performance
Distributed Computing. In Proceedings of
Supercom puting (SC98), 1998.
[2] T. Andrews and F. Curbera. Specification: Business
Process Execution Language for W eb Services V ersion
1.1. IBM DeveloperWorks, 2003. Available at

http://www-106.ibm.com/developerworks/library/wsbpel.
[3] W. Bausch. O PERA -G :A M icrokernelfor
Com putationalG rids. PhD thesis, Swiss Federal
Institute of Technology, Zurich, 2004.
[4] T. Bray and J. Paoli. Extensible M arkup Language
(X M L) 1.0. XML Core WG, W3C, 2004. Available at
http://www.w3.org/TR/2004/REC-xml-20040204.
[5] J. Cao, S. A. Jarvis, S. Saini, and G. R. Nudd.
GridFlow: Workflow Management for Grid
Computing. In Proceedings ofthe International
Sym posium on Cluster Com puting and the G rid
(CCG rid 2003), 2003.
[6] I. Foster and C. Kesselman. Globus: A
Metacomputing Infrastructure Toolkit. Intl.J.
Supercom puter A pplications, 11(2):115-128, 1997.
[7] I. Foster, C. Kesselman, J. M. Nick, and S. Tuecke.
The Physiology ofthe G rid: A n O pen G rid Services
A rchitecture for D istributed System s Integration.
91 Middleware 2004 Companion
Open Grid Service Infrastructure WG, Global Grid
Forum, 2002.
[8] I. Foster, C. Kesselman, and S. Tuecke. The Anatomy
of the Grid: Enabling Scalable Virtual Organization.
The Intl.JournalofH igh Perform ance Com puting
A pplications, 15(3):200-222, 2001.
[9] J. Frey, T. Tannenbaum, M. Livny, I. Foster, and
S. Tuecke. Condor-G: A Computational Management
Agent for Multi-institutional Grids. In Proceedings of
the Tenth Intl.Sym posium on H igh Perform ance
D istributed Com puting (H PD C-10). IEEE, 2001.
[10] A. S. Grimshaw and W. A. Wulf. Legion - A View
from 50,000 Feet. In Proceedings ofthe Fifth Intl.
Sym posium on H igh Perform ance D istributed
Com puting. IEEE, 1996.
[11] T. Lindholm and F. Yellin. The Java V irtualM achine
Specification. Sun Microsystems, Second Edition
edition, 1999.
[12] B. R. Schulze and E. R. M. Madeira. Grid Computing
with Active Services. Concurrency and Com putation:
Practice and Experience Journal, 5(16):535-542, 2004.
[13] J. Yan, Y. Yang, and G. K. Raikundalia. Enacting
Business Processes in a Decentralised Environment
with P2P-Based Workflow Support. In Proceedings of
the Fourth Intl.Conference on W eb-Age Inform ation
M anagem ent(W A IM 2003), 2003.
Middleware for Grid Computing 92
