Adaptive Duty Cycling for Energy Harvesting Systems
Jason Hsu, Sadaf Zahedi, Aman Kansal, Mani Srivastava
Electrical Engineering Department
University of California Los Angeles
{jasonh,kansal,szahedi,mbs} @ ee.ucla.edu
Vijay Raghunathan
NEC Labs America
Princeton, NJ
vijay@nec-labs.com
ABSTRACT
Harvesting energy from the environment is feasible in many
applications to ameliorate the energy limitations in sensor networks. In
this paper, we present an adaptive duty cycling algorithm that allows
energy harvesting sensor nodes to autonomously adjust their duty
cycle according to the energy availability in the environment. The
algorithm has three objectives, namely (a) achieving energy neutral
operation, i.e., energy consumption should not be more than the energy
provided by the environment, (b) maximizing the system performance
based on an application utility model subject to the above 
energyneutrality constraint, and (c) adapting to the dynamics of the energy
source at run-time. We present a model that enables harvesting sensor
nodes to predict future energy opportunities based on historical data.
We also derive an upper bound on the maximum achievable
performance assuming perfect knowledge about the future behavior of
the energy source. Our methods are evaluated using data gathered from
a prototype solar energy harvesting platform and we show that our
algorithm can utilize up to 58% more environmental energy compared
to the case when harvesting-aware power management is not used.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
C.2.4 [Computer Systems Organization]: Computer
Communication Networks-Distributed Systems
General Terms
Algorithms, Design
1. INTRODUCTION
Energy supply has always been a crucial issue in designing
battery-powered wireless sensor networks because the lifetime and
utility of the systems are limited by how long the batteries are able to
sustain the operation. The fidelity of the data produced by a sensor
network begins to degrade once sensor nodes start to run out of
battery power. Therefore, harvesting energy from the environment
has been proposed to supplement or completely replace battery
supplies to enhance system lifetime and reduce the maintenance cost
of replacing batteries periodically.
However, metrics for evaluating energy harvesting systems are
different from those used for battery powered systems.
Environmental energy is distinct from battery energy in two ways.
First it is an inexhaustible supply which, if appropriately used, can
allow the system to last forever, unlike the battery which is a limited
resource. Second, there is an uncertainty associated with its
availability and measurement, compared to the energy stored in the
battery which can be known deterministically. Thus, power
management methods based on battery status are not always
applicable to energy harvesting systems. In addition, most power
management schemes designed for battery-powered systems only
account for the dynamics of the energy consumers (e.g., CPU, radio)
but not the dynamics of the energy supply. Consequently, battery
powered systems usually operate at the lowest performance level that
meets the minimum data fidelity requirement in order to maximize
the system life. Energy harvesting systems, on the other hand, can
provide enhanced performance depending on the available energy.
In this paper, we will study how to adapt the performance of the
available energy profile. There exist many techniques to accomplish
performance scaling at the node level, such as radio transmit power
adjustment [1], dynamic voltage scaling [2], and the use of low
power modes [3]. However, these techniques require hardware
support and may not always be available on resource constrained
sensor nodes. Alternatively, a common performance scaling
technique is duty cycling. Low power devices typically provide at
least one low power mode in which the node is shut down and the
power consumption is negligible. In addition, the rate of duty cycling
is directly related to system performance metrics such as network
latency and sampling frequency. We will use duty cycle adjustment
as the primitive performance scaling technique in our algorithms.
2. RELATED WORK
Energy harvesting has been explored for several different types
of systems, such as wearable computers [4], [5], [6], sensor networks
[7], etc. Several technologies to extract energy from the environment
have been demonstrated including solar, motion-based, biochemical,
vibration-based [8], [9], [10], [11], and others are being developed
[12], [13]. While several energy harvesting sensor node platforms
have been prototyped [14], [15], [16], there is a need for systematic
power management techniques that provide performance guarantees
during system operation. The first work to take environmental
energy into account for data routing was [17], followed by [18].
While these works did demonstrate that environment aware
decisions improve performance compared to battery aware decisions,
their objective was not to achieve energy neutral operation. Our
proposed techniques attempt to maximize system performance while
maintaining energy-neutral operation.
3. SYSTEM MODEL
The energy usage considerations in a harvesting system vary
significantly from those in a battery powered system, as mentioned
earlier. We propose the model shown in Figure 1 for designing
energy management methods in a harvesting system. The functions
of the various blocks shown in the figure are discussed below. The
precise methods used in our system to achieve these functions will
be discussed in subsequent sections.
Harvested Energy Tracking: This block represents the mechanisms
used to measure the energy received from the harvesting device,
such as the solar panel. Such information is useful for determining
the energy availability profile and adapting system performance
based on it. Collecting this information requires that the node
hardware be equipped with the facility to measure the power
generated from the environment, and the Heliomote platform [14]
we used for evaluating the algorithms has this capability.
Energy Generation Model: For wireless sensor nodes with limited
storage and processing capabilities to be able to use the harvested
energy data, models that represent the essential components of this
information without using extensive storage are required. The
purpose of this block is to provide a model for the energy available
to the system in a form that may be used for making power
management decisions. The data measured by the energy tracking
block is used here to predict future energy availability. A good
prediction model should have a low prediction error and provide
predicted energy values for durations long enough to make
meaningful performance scaling decisions. Further, for energy
sources that exhibit both long-term and short-term patterns (e.g.,
diurnal and climate variations vs. weather patterns for solar energy),
the model must be able to capture both characteristics. Such a model
can also use information from external sources such as local weather
forecast service to improve its accuracy.
Energy Consumption Model: It is also important to have detailed
information about the energy usage characteristics of the system, at
various performance levels. For general applicability of our design,
we will assume that only one sleep mode is available. We assume
that the power consumption in the sleep and active modes is known.
It may be noted that for low power systems with more advanced
capabilities such as dynamic voltage scaling (DVS), multiple low
power modes, and the capability to shut down system components
selectively, the power consumption in each of the states and the
resultant effect on application performance should be known to make
power management decisions.
Energy Storage Model: This block represents the model for the
energy storage technology. Since all the generated energy may not be
used instantaneously, the harvesting system will usually have some
energy storage technology. Storage technologies (e.g., batteries and
ultra-capacitors) are non-ideal, in that there is some energy loss while
storing and retrieving energy from them. These characteristics must be
known to efficiently manage energy usage and storage. This block also
includes the system capability to measure the residual stored energy.
Most low power systems use batteries to store energy and provide
residual battery status. This is commonly based on measuring the
battery voltage which is then mapped to the residual battery energy
using the known charge to voltage relationship for the battery
technology in use. More sophisticated methods which track the flow of
energy into and out of the battery are also available.
Harvesting-aware Power Management: The inputs provided by the
previously mentioned blocks are used here to determine the suitable
power management strategy for the system. Power management
could be carried to meet different objectives in different applications.
For instance, in some systems, the harvested energy may marginally
supplement the battery supply and the objective may be to maximize
the system lifetime. A more interesting case is when the harvested
energy is used as the primary source of energy for the system with
the objective of achieving indefinitely long system lifetime. In such
cases, the power management objective is to achieve energy neutral
operation. In other words, the system should only use as much
energy as harvested from the environment and attempt to maximize
performance within this available energy budget.
4. THEORETICALLY OPTIMAL POWER
MANAGEMENT
We develop the following theory to understand the energy
neutral mode of operation. Let us define Ps(t) as the energy harvested
from the environment at time t, and the energy being consumed by
the load at that time is Pc(t). Further, we model the non-ideal storage
buffer by its round-trip efficiency η (strictly less than 1) and a
constant leakage power Pleak. Using this notation, applying the rule
of energy conservation leads to the following inequality:
0 0 00
[ ( ) ( )] [ ( ) ( )] 0
T T T
s c c s leakP t P t dt P t P t dt P dtB η
+ +
− − − ≥+ −∫ ∫ ∫ (1)
where B0 is the initial battery level and the function [X]+
= X if X > 0
and zero otherwise.
DEFINITION 1 (ρ,σ1,σ2) function: A non-negative, continuous and
bounded function P (t) is said to be a (ρ,σ1,σ2) function if and only if
for any value of finite real number T , the following are satisfied:
2 1( )
T
T P t dt Tρ σ ρ σ− ≤ ≤ +∫ (2)
This function can be used to model both energy sources and loads.
If the harvested energy profile Ps(t) is a (ρ1,σ1,σ2) function, then the
average rate of available energy over long durations becomes ρ1, and
the burstiness is bounded by σ1 and σ2 . Similarly, Pc(t) can be modeled
as a (ρ2,σ3) function, when ρ2 and σ3 are used to place an upper bound
on power consumption (the inequality on the right side) while there are
no minimum power consumption constraints.
The condition for energy neutrality, equation (1), leads to the
following theorem, based on the energy production, consumption, and
energy buffer models discussed above.
THEOREM 1 (ENERGY NEUTRAL OPERATION): Consider
a harvesting system in which the energy production profile is
characterized by a (ρ1, σ1, σ2) function, the load is characterized by
a (ρ2, σ3) function and the energy buffer is characterized by
parameters η for storage efficiency, and Pleak for leakage power. The
following conditions are sufficient for the system to achieve energy
neutrality:
ρ2 ≤ ηρ1 − Pleak (3)
B0 ≥ ησ2 + σ3 (4)
B ≥ B0 (5)
where B0 is the initial energy stored in the buffer and provides a
lower bound on the capacity of the energy buffer B. The proof is
presented in our prior work [19].
To adjust the duty cycle D using our performance scaling
algorithm, we assume the following relation between duty cycle and
the perceived utility of the system to the user: Suppose the utility of
the application to the user is represented by U(D) when the system
operates at a duty cycle D. Then,
min
1 min max
2 max
( ) 0,
( ) ,
( ) ,
U D if D D
U D k D if D D D
U D k if D D
β
= <
= + ≤ ≤
= >
This is a fairly general and simple model and the specific values of
Dmin and Dmax may be determined as per application requirements. As
an example, consider a sensor node designed to detect intrusion across
a periphery. In this case, a linear increase in duty cycle translates into a
linear increase in the detection probability. The fastest and the slowest
speeds of the intruders may be known, leading to a minimum and
Harvested Energy
Tracking
Energy Consumption
Model
Energy Storage Model

Harvestingaware Power
Mangement
Energy Generation
Model
LOAD
Figure 1. System model for an energy harvesting system.
181
maximum sensing delay tolerable, which results in the relevant Dmax
and Dmin for the sensor node. While there may be cases where the
relationship between utility and duty cycle may be non-linear, in this
paper, we restrict our focus on applications that follow this linear
model. In view of the above models for the system components and
the required performance, the objective of our power management
strategy is adjust the duty cycle D(i) dynamically so as to maximize
the total utility U(D) over a period of time, while ensuring energy
neutral operation for the sensor node.
Before discussing the performance scaling methods for harvesting
aware duty cycle adaptation, let us first consider the optimal power
management strategy that is possible for a given energy generation
profile. For the calculation of the optimal strategy, we assume
complete knowledge of the energy availability profile at the node,
including the availability in the future. The calculation of the optimal is
a useful tool for evaluating the performance of our proposed algorithm.
This is particularly useful for our algorithm since no prior algorithms
are available to serve as a baseline for comparison.
Suppose the time axis is partitioned into discrete slots of duration
ΔT, and the duty cycle adaptation calculation is carried out over a
window of Nw such time slots. We define the following energy profile
variables, with the index i ranging over {1,…, Nw}: Ps(i) is the power
output from the harvested source in time slot i, averaged over the slot
duration, Pc is the power consumption of the load in active mode, and
D(i) is the duty cycle used in slot i, whose value is to be determined.
B(i) is the residual battery energy at the beginning of slot i. Following
this convention, the battery energy left after the last slot in the window
is represented by B(Nw+1). The values of these variables will depend
on the choice of D(i).
The energy used directly from the harvested source and the energy
stored and used from the battery must be accounted for differently.
Figure 2 shows two possible cases for Ps(i) in a time slot. Ps(i) may
either be less than or higher than Pc , as shown on the left and right
respectively. When Ps(i) is lower than Pc, some of the energy used by
the load comes from the battery, while when Ps(i) is higher than Pc, all
the energy used is supplied directly from the harvested source. The
crosshatched area shows the energy that is available for storage into
the battery while the hashed area shows the energy drawn from the
battery. We can write the energy used from the battery in any slot i as:
( ) ( ) ( ) ( )[ ] ( ) ( ){ } ( ) ( )[ ]1 1c cs s sB i B i TD i P P i TP i D i TD i P i Pη η
+ +
− + = Δ − − Δ − − − (6)
In equation (6), the first term on the right hand side measures the
energy drawn from the battery when Ps(i) < Pc, the next term measures
the energy stored into the battery when the node is in sleep mode, and
the last term measures the energy stored into the battery in active mode
if Ps(i) > Pc. For energy neutral operation, we require the battery at the
end of the window of Nw slots to be greater than or equal to the starting
battery. Clearly, battery level will go down when the harvested energy
is not available and the system is operated from stored energy.
However, the window Nw is judiciously chosen such that over that
duration, we expect the environmental energy availability to complete
a periodic cycle. For instance, in the case of solar energy harvesting,
Nw could be chosen to be a twenty-four hour duration, corresponding
to the diurnal cycle in the harvested energy. This is an approximation
since an ideal choice of the window size would be infinite, but a finite
size must be used for analytical tractability. Further, the battery level
cannot be negative at any time, and this is ensured by having a large
enough initial battery level B0 such that node operation is sustained
even in the case of total blackout during a window period. Stating the
above constraints quantitatively, we can express the calculation of the
optimal duty cycles as an optimization problem below:
1
max ( )
wN
i
D i
=
∑ (7)
( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ){ } ( ) ( )1 1c s s s cB i B i TD i P P i TP i D i TD i P i Pη η
+ +
⎡ ⎤ ⎡ ⎤− + = Δ − − Δ − − −⎣ ⎦ ⎣ ⎦
(8)
0(1)B B= (9)
0( 1)wB N B+ ≥ (10)
min w( ) i {1,...,N }D i D≥ ∀ ∈ (11)
max w( ) i {1,...,N }D i D≤ ∀ ∈ (12)
The solution to the optimization problem yields the duty cycles
that must be used in every slot and the evolution of residual battery
over the course of Nw slots. Note that while the constraints above
contain the non-linear function [x]+
, the quantities occurring within
that function are all known constants. The variable quantities occur
only in linear terms and hence the above optimization problem can
be solved using standard linear programming techniques, available
in popular optimization toolboxes.
5. HARVESTING-AWARE POWER
MANAGEMENT
We now present a practical algorithm for power management that
may be used for adapting the performance based on harvested energy
information. This algorithm attempts to achieve energy neutral
operation without using knowledge of the future energy availability
and maximizes the achievable performance within that constraint.
The harvesting-aware power management strategy consists of
three parts. The first part is an instantiation of the energy generation
model which tracks past energy input profiles and uses them to
predict future energy availability. The second part computes the
optimal duty cycles based on the predicted energy, and this step
uses our computationally tractable method to solve the optimization
problem. The third part consists of a method to dynamically adapt
the duty cycle in response to the observed energy generation profile
in real time. This step is required since the observed energy
generation may deviate significantly from the predicted energy
availability and energy neutral operation must be ensured with the
actual energy received rather than the predicted values.
5.1. Energy Prediction Model
We use a prediction model based on Exponentially Weighted
Moving-Average (EWMA). The method is designed to exploit the
diurnal cycle in solar energy but at the same time adapt to the seasonal
variations. A historical summary of the energy generation profile is
maintained for this purpose. While the storage data size is limited to a
vector length of Nw values in order to minimize the memory overheads
of the power management algorithm, the window size is effectively
infinite as each value in the history window depends on all the
observed data up to that instant. The window size is chosen to be 24
hours and each time slot is taken to be 30 minutes as the variation in
generated power by the solar panel using this setting is less than 10%
between each adjacent slots. This yields Nw = 48. Smaller slot
durations may be used at the expense of a higher Nw.
The historical summary maintained is derived as follows. On a
typical day, we expect the energy generation to be similar to the energy
generation at the same time on the previous days. The value of energy
generated in a particular slot is maintained as a weighted average of the
energy received in the same time-slot during all observed days. The
weights are exponential, resulting in decaying contribution from older
Figure 2. Two possible cases for energy calculations
Slot i Slot k
Pc
Pc
P(i)
P(i)
Active Sleep
182
data. More specifically, the historical average maintained for each slot
is given by:
1 (1 )k k kx x xα α−= + −
where α is the value of the weighting factor, kx is the observed value
of energy generated in the slot, and 1kx −
is the previously stored
historical average. In this model, the importance of each day relative to
the previous one remains constant because the same weighting factor
was used for all days.
The average value derived for a slot is treated as an estimate of
predicted energy value for the slot corresponding to the subsequent
day. This method helps the historical average values adapt to the
seasonal variations in energy received on different days. One of the
parameters to be chosen in the above prediction method is the
parameter α, which is a measure of rate of shift in energy pattern over
time. Since this parameter is affected by the characteristics of the
energy and sensor node location, the system should have a training
period during which this parameter will be determined. To determine a
good value of α, we collected energy data over 72 days and compared
the average error of the prediction method for various values of α. The
error based on the different values of α is shown in Figure 3. This
curve suggests an optimum value of α = 0.15 for minimum prediction
error and this value will be used in the remainder of this paper.
5.2. Low-complexity Solution
The energy values predicted for the next window of Nw slots are
used to calculated the desired duty cycles for the next window,
assuming the predicted values match the observed values in the future.
Since our objective is to develop a practical algorithm for embedded
computing systems, we present a simplified method to solve the linear
programming problem presented in Section 4. To this end, we define
the sets S and D as follows:
{ }
{ }
| ( ) 0
| ( ) 0
s c
c s
S i P i P
D i P P i
= − ≥
= − >
The two sets differ by the condition that whether the node operation
can be sustained entirely from environmental energy. In the case that
energy produced from the environment is not sufficient, battery will be
discharged to supplement the remaining energy. Next we sum up both
sides of (6) over the entire Nw window and rewrite it with the new
notation.
1
1 1 1
( )[ ( )] ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )[ ( ) ]
Nw Nw Nw
i i c s s s s c
i i D i i i S
B B TD i P P i TP i TP i D i TD i P i Pη η η+
= ∈ = = ∈
− = Δ − − Δ + Δ − Δ −∑ ∑ ∑ ∑ ∑
The term on the left hand side is actually the battery energy used over
the entire window of Nw slots, which can be set to 0 for energy neutral
operation. After some algebraic manipulation, this yields:
1
1
( ) ( ) ( ) 1 ( )
Nw
c
s s c
i i D i S
P
P i D i P i P D i
η η= ∈ ∈
⎛ ⎞⎛ ⎞
= + − +⎜ ⎟⎜ ⎟
⎝ ⎠⎝ ⎠
∑ ∑ ∑ (13)
The term on the left hand side is the total energy received in Nw
slots. The first term on the right hand side can be interpreted as the
total energy consumed during the D slots and the second term is the
total energy consumed during the S slots. We can now replace three
constraints (8), (9), and (10) in the original problem with (13), restating
the optimization problem as follows:
1
max ( )
wN
i
D i
=
∑
1
1
( ) ( ) ( ) 1 ( )
Nw
c
s s c
i i D i S
P
P i D i P i P D i
η η= ∈ ∈
⎛ ⎞⎛ ⎞
= + − +⎜ ⎟⎜ ⎟
⎝ ⎠⎝ ⎠
∑ ∑ ∑
min
max
D(i) D {1,...,Nw)
D(i) D {1,...,Nw)
i
i
≥ ∀ ∈
≤ ∀ ∈
This form facilitates a low complexity solution that doesn"t require
a general linear programming solver. Since our objective is to
maximize the total system utility, it is preferable to set the duty cycle to
Dmin for time slots where the utility per unit energy is the least. On the
other hand, we would also like the time slots with the highest Ps to
operate at Dmax because of better efficiency of using energy directly
from the energy source. Combining these two characteristics, we
define the utility co-efficient for each slot i as follows:
1
( ) 1
1 ( ) 1
c
c
s
P for i S
W i P
P i for i D
η η
∈⎧
⎪
= ⎛ ⎞⎛ ⎞⎨
+ − ∈⎜ ⎟⎜ ⎟⎪
⎝ ⎠⎝ ⎠⎩
where W(i) is a representation of how efficient the energy usage in a
particular time slot i is. A larger W(i) indicates more system utility per
unit energy in slot i and vice versa. The algorithm starts by assuming
D(i) =Dmin for i = {1…NW} because of the minimum duty cycle
requirement, and computes the remaining system energy R by:
1
1
( ) ( ) ( ) 1 ( ) (14)
Nw
c
s s c
i i D i S
P
R P i D i P i P D i
η η= ∈ ∈
⎛ ⎞⎛ ⎞
= − + − −⎜ ⎟⎜ ⎟
⎝ ⎠⎝ ⎠
∑ ∑ ∑
A negative R concludes that the optimization problem is infeasible,
meaning the system cannot achieve energy neutrality even at the
minimum duty cycle. In this case, the system designer is responsible
for increasing the environment energy availability (e.g., by using larger
solar panels). If R is positive, it means the system has excess energy
that is not being used, and this may be allocated to increase the duty
cycle beyond Dmin for some slots. Since our objective is to maximize
the total system utility, the most efficient way to allocate the excess
energy is to assign duty cycle Dmax to the slots with the highest W(i).
So, the coefficients W(i) are arranged in decreasing order and duty
cycle Dmax is assigned to the slots beginning with the largest
coefficients until the excess energy available, R (computed by (14) in
every iteration), is insufficient to assign Dmax to another slot. The
remaining energy, RLast, is used to increase the duty cycle to some
value between Dmin and Dmax in the slot with the next lower coefficient.
Denoting this slot with index j, the duty cycle is given by:
D(j)=
min
/
( ( ) ) / ( )
Last c
Last
s c s
R P if j D
DR
if j S
P j P P jη
∈⎧ ⎫
⎪ ⎪
+⎨ ⎬
∈⎪ ⎪− −⎩ ⎭
The above solution to the optimization problem requires only simple
arithmetic calculations and one sorting step which can be easily
implemented on an embedded platform, as opposed to implementing a
general linear program solver.
5.3. Slot-by-slot continual duty cycle adaptiation.
The observed energy values may vary greatly from the predicted
ones, such as due to the effect of clouds or other sudden changes. It is
thus important to adapt the duty cycles calculated using the predicted
values, to the actual energy measurements in real time to ensure energy
neutrality. Denote the initial duty cycle assignments for each time slot i
computed using the predicted energy values as D(i) = {1, ...,Nw}. First
we compute the difference between predicted power level Ps(i) and
actual power level observed, Ps"(i) in every slot i. Then, the excess
energy in slot i, denoted by X, can be obtained as follows:
( ) '( ) '( )
1
( ) '( ) ( )[ ( ) '( )](1 ) '( )
s s s c
s s s s s c
P i P i if P i P
X
P i P i D i P i P i if P i P
η
− >⎧
⎪
= ⎨
− − − − ≤⎪
⎩
0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45 0.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
3
alpha
AvgError(mA)
Figure 3. Choice of prediction parameter.
183
The upper term accounts for the energy difference when actual
received energy is more than the power drawn by the load. On the
other hand, if the energy received is less than Pc, we will need to
account for the extra energy used from the battery by the load, which is
a function of duty cycle used in time slot i and battery efficiency factor
η. When more energy is received than predicted, X is positive and that
excess energy is available for use in the subsequent solutes, while if X
is negative, that energy must be compensated from subsequent slots.
CASE I: X<0. In this case, we want to reduce the duty cycles used in
the future slots in order to make up for this shortfall of energy. Since
our objective function is to maximize the total system utility, we have
to reduce the duty cycles for time slots with the smallest normalized
utility coefficient, W(i). This is accomplished by first sorting the
coefficient W(j) ,where j>i. in decreasing order, and then iteratively
reducing Dj to Dmin until the total reduction in energy consumption is
the same as X.
CASE II: X>0. Here, we want to increase the duty cycles used in the
future to utilize this excess energy we received in recent time slot. In
contrast to Case I, the duty cycles of future time slots with highest
utility coefficient W(i) should be increased first in order to maximize
the total system utility.
Suppose the duty cycle is changed by d in slot j. Define a quantity
R(j,d) as follows:
⎪
⎩
⎪
⎨
⎧
<=⎟
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎜
⎝
⎛
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
−+
>⋅
=
lji
l
ljl
PPifP
P
d
PPifP
djR
　　　
1
1
　　d　　
),(
ηη
The precise procedure to adapt the duty cycle to account for the
above factors is presented in Algorithm 1. This calculation is
performed at the end of every slot to set the duty cycle for the next
slot. We claim that our duty cycling algorithm is energy neutral
because an surplus of energy at the previous time slot will always
translate to additional energy opportunity for future time slots, and
vice versa. The claim may be violated in cases of severe energy
shortages especially towards the end of window. For example, a large
deficit in energy supply can"t be restored if there is no future energy
input until the end of the window. In such case, this offset will be
carried over to the next window so that long term energy neutrality is
still maintained.
6. EVALUATION
Our adaptive duty cycling algorithm was evaluated using an actual
solar energy profile measured using a sensor node called Heliomote,
capable of harvesting solar energy [14]. This platform not only tracks
the generated energy but also the energy flow into and out of the
battery to provide an accurate estimate of the stored energy.
The energy harvesting platform was deployed in a residential area
in Los Angeles from the beginning of June through the middle of
August for a total of 72 days. The sensor node used is a Mica2 mote
running at a fixed 40% duty cycle with an initially full battery. Battery
voltage and net current from the solar panels are sampled at a period of
10 seconds. The energy generation profile for that duration, measured
by tracking the output current from the solar cell is shown in Figure 4,
both on continuous and diurnal scales. We can observe that although
the energy profile varies from day to day, it still exhibits a general
pattern over several days.
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Day
mA
0 5 10 15 20
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Hour
mA
6.1. Prediction Model
We first evaluate the performance of the prediction model, which
is judged by the amount of absolute error it made between the
predicted and actual energy profile. Figure 5 shows the average error
of each time slot in mA over the entire 72 days. Generally, the amount
of error is larger during the day time because that"s when the factor of
weather can cause deviations in received energy, while the prediction
made for night time is mostly correct.
6.2. Adaptive Duty cycling algorithm
Prior methods to optimize performance while achieving energy
neutral operation using harvested energy are scarce. Instead, we
compare the performance of our algorithm against two extremes: the
theoretical optimal calculated assuming complete knowledge about
future energy availability and a simple approach which attempts to
achieve energy neutrality using a fixed duty cycle without accounting
for battery inefficiency.
The optimal duty cycles are calculated for each slot using the
future knowledge of actual received energy for that slot. For the simple
approach, the duty cycle is kept constant within each day and is
Figure 4 Solar Energy Profile (Left: Continuous, Right: Diurnal)
Input: D: Initial duty cycle, X: Excess energy due to error in the
prediction, P: Predicted energy profile, i: index of current time slot
Output: D: Updated duty cycles in one or more subsequent slots
AdaptDutyCycle()
Iteration: At each time slot do:
if X > 0
Wsorted = W{1, ...,Nw} sorted in decending order.
Q := indices of Wsorted
for k = 1 to |Q|
if Q(k) ≤ i or D(Q(k)) ≥ Dmax //slot is already passed
continue
if R(Q(k), Dmax − D(Q(k))) < X
D(Q(k)) = Dmax
X = X − R(j, Dmax − D(Q(k)))
else
//X insufficient to increase duty cycle to Dmax
if P (Q(k)) > Pl
D(Q(k)) = D(Q(k)) + X/Pl
else
D(Q(k)) = D(Q(k)) +
( ( ))(1 1 ))c s
X
P P Q kη η+ −
if X < 0
Wsorted = W{1, ...,Nw} sorted in ascending order.
Q := indices of Wsorted
for k = 1 to |Q|
if Q(k) ≤ I or D(Q(k)) ≤ Dmin
continue
if R(Q(k), Dmax − D(Q(k))) > X
D(Q(k)) = Dmin
X = X − R(j, Dmin − D(Q(k)))
else
if P (Q(k)) > Pc
D(Q(k)) = D(Q(k)) + X/Pc
else
D(Q(k)) = D(Q(k)) +
( ( ))(1 1 ))c s
X
P P Q kη η+ −
ALGORITHM 1 Pseudocode for the duty-cycle adaptation algorithm
Figure 5. Average Predictor Error in mA
0 5 10 15 20 25
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Time(H)
abserror(mA)
184
computed by taking the ratio of the predicted energy availability and
the maximum usage, and this guarantees that the senor node will never
deplete its battery running at this duty cycle.
{1.. )
( )s w c
i Nw
D P i N Pη
∈
= ⋅ ⋅∑
We then compare the performance of our algorithm to the two
extremes with varying battery efficiency. Figure 6 shows the results,
using Dmax = 0.8 and Dmin = 0.3. The battery efficiency was varied
from 0.5 to 1 on the x-axis and solar energy utilizations achieved by
the three algorithms are shown on the y-axis. It shows the fraction of
net received energy that is used to perform useful work rather than lost
due to storage inefficiency.
As can be seen from the figure, battery efficiency factor has great
impact on the performance of the three different approaches. The three
approaches all converges to 100% utilization if we have a perfect
battery (η=1), that is, energy is not lost by storing it into the batteries.
When battery inefficiency is taken into account, both the adaptive and
optimal approach have much better solar energy utilization rate than
the simple one. Additionally, the result also shows that our adaptive
duty cycle algorithm performs extremely close to the optimal.
0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Eta-batery roundtrip efficiency
SolarEnergyUtilization(%)
Optimal
Adaptive
Simple
We also compare the performance of our algorithm with different
values of Dmin and Dmax for η=0.7, which is typical of NiMH batteries.
These results are shown in Table 1 as the percentage of energy saved
by the optimal and adaptive approaches, and this is the energy which
would normally be wasted in the simple approach. The figures and
table indicate that our real time algorithm is able to achieve a
performance very close to the optimal feasible. In addition, these
results show that environmental energy harvesting with appropriate
power management can achieve much better utilization of the
environmental energy.
Dmax
Dmin
0.8
0.05
0.8
0.1
0.8
0.3
0.5
0.2
0.9
0.2
1.0
0.2
Adaptive 51.0% 48.2% 42.3% 29.4% 54.7% 58.7%
Optimal 52.3% 49.6% 43.7% 36.7% 56.6% 60.8%
7. CONCLUSIONS
We discussed various issues in power management for systems
powered using environmentally harvested energy. Specifically, we
designed a method for optimizing performance subject to the
constraint of energy neutral operation. We also derived a theoretically
optimal bound on the performance and showed that our proposed
algorithm operated very close to the optimal. The proposals were
evaluated using real data collected using an energy harvesting sensor
node deployed in an outdoor environment.
Our method has significant advantages over currently used
methods which are based on a conservative estimate of duty cycle and
can only provide sub-optimal performance. However, this work is only
the first step towards optimal solutions for energy neutral operation. It
is designed for a specific power scaling method based on adapting the
duty cycle. Several other power scaling methods, such as DVS, 
submodule power switching and the use of multiple low power modes are
also available. It is thus of interest to extend our methods to exploit
these advanced capabilities.
8. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research was funded in part through support provided by
DARPA under the PAC/C program, the National Science Foundation
(NSF) under award #0306408, and the UCLA Center for Embedded
Networked Sensing (CENS). Any opinions, findings, conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this paper are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of DARPA, NSF, or CENS.
REFERENCES
[1] R Ramanathan, and R Hain, Toplogy Control of Multihop Wireless
Networks Using Transmit Power Adjustment in Proc. Infocom. Vol 2.
26-30 pp. 404-413. March 2000
[2] T.A. Pering, T.D. Burd, and R. W. Brodersen,  The simulation and
evaluation of dynamic voltage scaling algorithms, in Proc. ACM
ISLPED, pp. 76-81, 1998
[3] L. Benini and G. De Micheli, Dynamic Power Management: Design
Techniques and CAD Tools. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Norwell, MA,
1997.
[4] John Kymisis, Clyde Kendall, Joseph Paradiso, and Neil Gershenfeld.
Parasitic power harvesting in shoes. In ISWC, pages 132-139. IEEE
Computer Society press, October 1998.
[5] Nathan S. Shenck and Joseph A. Paradiso. Energy scavenging with 
shoemounted piezoelectrics. IEEE Micro, 21(3):30ñ42, May-June 2001.
[6] T Starner. Human-powered wearable computing. IBM Systems Journal,
35(3-4), 1996.
[7] Mohammed Rahimi, Hardik Shah, Gaurav S. Sukhatme, John
Heidemann, and D. Estrin. Studying the feasibility of energy harvesting in
a mobile sensor network. In ICRA, 2003.
[8] ChrisMelhuish. The ecobot project. www.ias.uwe.ac.uk/energy
autonomy/EcoBot web page.html.
[9] Jan M.Rabaey, M. Josie Ammer, Julio L. da Silva Jr., Danny Patel, and
Shad Roundy. Picoradio supports ad-hoc ultra-low power wireless
networking. IEEE Computer, pages 42-48, July 2000.
[10] Joseph A. Paradiso and Mark Feldmeier. A compact, wireless, 
selfpowered pushbutton controller. In ACM Ubicomp, pages 299-304,
Atlanta, GA, USA, September 2001. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.
[11] SE Wright, DS Scott, JB Haddow, andMA Rosen. The upper limit to solar
energy conversion. volume 1, pages 384 - 392, July 2000.
[12] Darpa energy harvesting projects.
http://www.darpa.mil/dso/trans/energy/projects.html.
[13] Werner Weber. Ambient intelligence: industrial research on a visionary
concept. In Proceedings of the 2003 international symposium on Low
power electronics and design, pages 247-251. ACM Press, 2003.
[14] V Raghunathan, A Kansal, J Hsu, J Friedman, and MB Srivastava,
"Design Considerations for Solar Energy Harvesting Wireless Embedded
Systems," (IPSN/SPOTS), April 2005.
[15] Xiaofan Jiang, Joseph Polastre, David Culler, Perpetual Environmentally
Powered Sensor Networks, (IPSN/SPOTS), April 25-27, 2005.
[16] Chulsung Park, Pai H. Chou, and Masanobu Shinozuka, "DuraNode:
Wireless Networked Sensor for Structural Health Monitoring," to appear
in Proceedings of the 4th IEEE International Conference on Sensors,
Irvine, CA, Oct. 31 - Nov. 1, 2005.
[17] Aman Kansal and Mani B. Srivastava. An environmental energy
harvesting framework for sensor networks. In International symposium on
Low power electronicsand design, pages 481-486. ACM Press, 2003.
[18] Thiemo Voigt, Hartmut Ritter, and Jochen Schiller. Utilizing solar power
in wireless sensor networks. In LCN, 2003.
[19] A. Kansal, J. Hsu, S. Zahedi, and M. B. Srivastava. Power management
in energy harvesting sensor networks. Technical Report 
TR-UCLA-NESL200603-02, Networked and Embedded Systems Laboratory, UCLA,
March 2006.
Figure 6. Duty Cycles achieved with respect to η
TABLE 1. Energy Saved by adaptive and optimal approach.
185
