A Frequency-based and a Poisson-based Definition of the
Probability of Being Informative
Thomas Roelleke
Department of Computer Science
Queen Mary University of London
thor@dcs.qmul.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
This paper reports on theoretical investigations about the
assumptions underlying the inverse document frequency (idf ).
We show that an intuitive idf -based probability function for
the probability of a term being informative assumes disjoint
document events. By assuming documents to be 
independent rather than disjoint, we arrive at a Poisson-based 
probability of being informative. The framework is useful for
understanding and deciding the parameter estimation and
combination in probabilistic retrieval models.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Retrieval
models
General Terms
Theory
1. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
The inverse document frequency (idf ) is one of the most
successful parameters for a relevance-based ranking of 
retrieved objects. With N being the total number of 
documents, and n(t) being the number of documents in which
term t occurs, the idf is defined as follows:
idf(t) := − log
n(t)
N
, 0 <= idf(t) < ∞
Ranking based on the sum of the idf -values of the query
terms that occur in the retrieved documents works well, this
has been shown in numerous applications. Also, it is well
known that the combination of a document-specific term
weight and idf works better than idf alone. This approach
is known as tf-idf , where tf(t, d) (0 <= tf(t, d) <= 1) is
the so-called term frequency of term t in document d. The
idf reflects the discriminating power (informativeness) of a
term, whereas the tf reflects the occurrence of a term.
The idf alone works better than the tf alone does. An 
explanation might be the problem of tf with terms that occur
in many documents; let us refer to those terms as noisy
terms. We use the notion of noisy terms rather than 
frequent terms since frequent terms leaves open whether we
refer to the document frequency of a term in a collection or
to the so-called term frequency (also referred to as 
withindocument frequency) of a term in a document. We 
associate noise with the document frequency of a term in a
collection, and we associate occurrence with the 
withindocument frequency of a term. The tf of a noisy term might
be high in a document, but noisy terms are not good 
candidates for representing a document. Therefore, the removal
of noisy terms (known as stopword removal) is essential
when applying tf . In a tf-idf approach, the removal of 
stopwords is conceptually obsolete, if stopwords are just words
with a low idf .
From a probabilistic point of view, tf is a value with a
frequency-based probabilistic interpretation whereas idf has
an informative rather than a probabilistic interpretation.
The missing probabilistic interpretation of idf is a problem
in probabilistic retrieval models where we combine uncertain
knowledge of different dimensions (e.g.: informativeness of
terms, structure of documents, quality of documents, age
of documents, etc.) such that a good estimate of the 
probability of relevance is achieved. An intuitive solution is a
normalisation of idf such that we obtain values in the 
interval [0; 1]. For example, consider a normalisation based on
the maximal idf -value. Let T be the set of terms occurring
in a collection.
Pfreq (t is informative) :=
idf(t)
maxidf
maxidf := max({idf(t)|t ∈ T}), maxidf <= − log(1/N)
minidf := min({idf(t)|t ∈ T}), minidf >= 0
minidf
maxidf
≤ Pfreq (t is informative) ≤ 1.0
This frequency-based probability function covers the interval
[0; 1] if the minimal idf is equal to zero, which is the case
if we have at least one term that occurs in all documents.
Can we interpret Pfreq , the normalised idf , as the probability
that the term is informative?
When investigating the probabilistic interpretation of the
227
normalised idf , we made several observations related to 
disjointness and independence of document events. These 
observations are reported in section 3. We show in section 3.1
that the frequency-based noise probability n(t)
N
used in the
classic idf -definition can be explained by three assumptions:
binary term occurrence, constant document containment and
disjointness of document containment events. In section 3.2
we show that by assuming independence of documents, we
obtain 1 − e−1
≈ 1 − 0.37 as the upper bound of the noise
probability of a term. The value e−1
is related to the 
logarithm and we investigate in section 3.3 the link to 
information theory. In section 4, we link the results of the previous
sections to probability theory. We show the steps from 
possible worlds to binomial distribution and Poisson distribution.
In section 5, we emphasise that the theoretical framework
of this paper is applicable for both idf and tf . Finally, in
section 6, we base the definition of the probability of 
being informative on the results of the previous sections and
compare frequency-based and Poisson-based definitions.
2. BACKGROUND
The relationship between frequencies, probabilities and
information theory (entropy) has been the focus of many
researchers. In this background section, we focus on work
that investigates the application of the Poisson distribution
in IR since a main part of the work presented in this paper
addresses the underlying assumptions of Poisson.
[4] proposes a 2-Poisson model that takes into account
the different nature of relevant and non-relevant documents,
rare terms (content words) and frequent terms (noisy terms,
function words, stopwords). [9] shows experimentally that
most of the terms (words) in a collection are distributed
according to a low dimension n-Poisson model. [10] uses a
2-Poisson model for including term frequency-based 
probabilities in the probabilistic retrieval model. The non-linear
scaling of the Poisson function showed significant 
improvement compared to a linear frequency-based probability. The
Poisson model was here applied to the term frequency of a
term in a document. We will generalise the discussion by
pointing out that document frequency and term frequency
are dual parameters in the collection space and the 
document space, respectively. Our discussion of the Poisson 
distribution focuses on the document frequency in a collection
rather than on the term frequency in a document.
[7] and [6] address the deviation of idf and Poisson, and
apply Poisson mixtures to achieve better Poisson-based 
estimates. The results proved again experimentally that a 
onedimensional Poisson does not work for rare terms, therefore
Poisson mixtures and additional parameters are proposed.
[3], section 3.3, illustrates and summarises 
comprehensively the relationships between frequencies, probabilities
and Poisson. Different definitions of idf are put into 
context and a notion of noise is defined, where noise is viewed
as the complement of idf . We use in our paper a different
notion of noise: we consider a frequency-based noise that
corresponds to the document frequency, and we consider a
term noise that is based on the independence of document
events.
[11], [12], [8] and [1] link frequencies and probability 
estimation to information theory. [12] establishes a framework
in which information retrieval models are formalised based
on probabilistic inference. A key component is the use of a
space of disjoint events, where the framework mainly uses
terms as disjoint events. The probability of being 
informative defined in our paper can be viewed as the probability
of the disjoint terms in the term space of [12].
[8] address entropy and bibliometric distributions. 
Entropy is maximal if all events are equiprobable and the 
frequency-based Lotka law (N/iλ
is the number of scientists
that have written i publications, where N and λ are 
distribution parameters), Zipf and the Pareto distribution are 
related. The Pareto distribution is the continuous case of the
Lotka and Lotka and Zipf show equivalences. The Pareto
distribution is used by [2] for term frequency normalisation.
The Pareto distribution compares to the Poisson 
distribution in the sense that Pareto is fat-tailed, i. e. Pareto 
assigns larger probabilities to large numbers of events than
Poisson distributions do. This makes Pareto interesting
since Poisson is felt to be too radical on frequent events.
We restrict in this paper to the discussion of Poisson, 
however, our results show that indeed a smoother distribution
than Poisson promises to be a good candidate for improving
the estimation of probabilities in information retrieval.
[1] establishes a theoretical link between tf-idf and 
information theory and the theoretical research on the meaning
of tf-idf clarifies the statistical model on which the different
measures are commonly based. This motivation matches
the motivation of our paper: We investigate theoretically
the assumptions of classical idf and Poisson for a better
understanding of parameter estimation and combination.
3. FROM DISJOINT TO INDEPENDENT
We define and discuss in this section three probabilities:
The frequency-based noise probability (definition 1), the 
total noise probability for disjoint documents (definition 2).
and the noise probability for independent documents 
(definition 3).
3.1 Binary occurrence, constant containment
and disjointness of documents
We show in this section, that the frequency-based noise
probability n(t)
N
in the idf definition can be explained as
a total probability with binary term occurrence, constant
document containment and disjointness of document 
containments.
We refer to a probability function as binary if for all events
the probability is either 1.0 or 0.0. The occurrence 
probability P(t|d) is binary, if P(t|d) is equal to 1.0 if t ∈ d, and
P(t|d) is equal to 0.0, otherwise.
P(t|d) is binary : ⇐⇒ P(t|d) = 1.0 ∨ P(t|d) = 0.0
We refer to a probability function as constant if for all
events the probability is equal. The document containment
probability reflect the chance that a document occurs in a
collection. This containment probability is constant if we
have no information about the document containment or
we ignore that documents differ in containment. 
Containment could be derived, for example, from the size, quality,
age, links, etc. of a document. For a constant containment
in a collection with N documents, 1
N
is often assumed as
the containment probability. We generalise this definition
and introduce the constant λ where 0 ≤ λ ≤ N. The 
containment of a document d depends on the collection c, this
is reflected by the notation P(d|c) used for the containment
228
of a document.
P(d|c) is constant : ⇐⇒ ∀d : P(d|c) =
λ
N
For disjoint documents that cover the whole event space,
we set λ = 1 and obtain
Èd P(d|c) = 1.0. Next, we define
the frequency-based noise probability and the total noise
probability for disjoint documents. We introduce the event
notation t is noisy and t occurs for making the difference
between the noise probability P(t is noisy|c) in a collection
and the occurrence probability P(t occurs|d) in a document
more explicit, thereby keeping in mind that the noise 
probability corresponds to the occurrence probability of a term
in a collection.
Definition 1. The frequency-based term noise 
probability:
Pfreq (t is noisy|c) :=
n(t)
N
Definition 2. The total term noise probability for
disjoint documents:
Pdis (t is noisy|c) :=
d
P(t occurs|d) · P(d|c)
Now, we can formulate a theorem that makes assumptions
explicit that explain the classical idf .
Theorem 1. IDF assumptions: If the occurrence 
probability P(t|d) of term t over documents d is binary, and
the containment probability P(d|c) of documents d is 
constant, and document containments are disjoint events, then
the noise probability for disjoint documents is equal to the
frequency-based noise probability.
Pdis (t is noisy|c) = Pfreq (t is noisy|c)
Proof. The assumptions are:
∀d : (P(t occurs|d) = 1 ∨ P(t occurs|d) = 0) ∧
P(d|c) =
λ
N
∧
d
P(d|c) = 1.0
We obtain:
Pdis (t is noisy|c) =
d|t∈d
1
N
=
n(t)
N
= Pfreq (t is noisy|c)
The above result is not a surprise but it is a 
mathematical formulation of assumptions that can be used to explain
the classical idf . The assumptions make explicit that the
different types of term occurrence in documents (frequency
of a term, importance of a term, position of a term, 
document part where the term occurs, etc.) and the different
types of document containment (size, quality, age, etc.) are
ignored, and document containments are considered as 
disjoint events.
From the assumptions, we can conclude that idf 
(frequencybased noise, respectively) is a relatively simple but strict
estimate. Still, idf works well. This could be explained
by a leverage effect that justifies the binary occurrence and
constant containment: The term occurrence for small 
documents tends to be larger than for large documents, whereas
the containment for small documents tends to be smaller
than for large documents. From that point of view, idf
means that P(t ∧ d|c) is constant for all d in which t occurs,
and P(t ∧ d|c) is zero otherwise. The occurrence and 
containment can be term specific. For example, set P(t∧d|c) =
1/ND(c) if t occurs in d, where ND(c) is the number of 
documents in collection c (we used before just N). We choose a
document-dependent occurrence P(t|d) := 1/NT (d), i. e. the
occurrence probability is equal to the inverse of NT (d), which
is the total number of terms in document d. Next, we choose
the containment P(d|c) := NT (d)/NT (c)·NT (c)/ND(c) where
NT (d)/NT (c) is a document length normalisation (number
of terms in document d divided by the number of terms in
collection c), and NT (c)/ND(c) is a constant factor of the
collection (number of terms in collection c divided by the
number of documents in collection c). We obtain P(t∧d|c) =
1/ND(c).
In a tf-idf -retrieval function, the tf -component reflects
the occurrence probability of a term in a document. This is
a further explanation why we can estimate the idf with a
simple P(t|d), since the combined tf-idf contains the 
occurrence probability. The containment probability corresponds
to a document normalisation (document length 
normalisation, pivoted document length) and is normally attached to
the tf -component or the tf-idf -product.
The disjointness assumption is typical for frequency-based
probabilities. From a probability theory point of view, we
can consider documents as disjoint events, in order to achieve
a sound theoretical model for explaining the classical idf .
But does disjointness reflect the real world where the 
containment of a document appears to be independent of the
containment of another document? In the next section, we
replace the disjointness assumption by the independence 
assumption.
3.2 The upper bound of the noise probability
for independent documents
For independent documents, we compute the probability
of a disjunction as usual, namely as the complement of the
probability of the conjunction of the negated events:
P(d1 ∨ . . . ∨ dN ) = 1 − P(¬d1 ∧ . . . ∧ ¬dN )
= 1 −
d
(1 − P(d))
The noise probability can be considered as the conjunction
of the term occurrence and the document containment.
P(t is noisy|c) := P(t occurs ∧ (d1 ∨ . . . ∨ dN )|c)
For disjoint documents, this view of the noise probability
led to definition 2. For independent documents, we use now
the conjunction of negated events.
Definition 3. The term noise probability for 
independent documents:
Pin (t is noisy|c) :=
d
(1 − P(t occurs|d) · P(d|c))
With binary occurrence and a constant containment P(d|c) :=
λ/N, we obtain the term noise of a term t that occurs in n(t)
documents:
Pin (t is noisy|c) = 1 − 1 −
λ
N
n(t)
229
For binary occurrence and disjoint documents, the 
containment probability was 1/N. Now, with independent 
documents, we can use λ as a collection parameter that controls
the average containment probability. We show through the
next theorem that the upper bound of the noise probability
depends on λ.
Theorem 2. The upper bound of being noisy: If the
occurrence P(t|d) is binary, and the containment P(d|c)
is constant, and document containments are independent
events, then 1 − e−λ
is the upper bound of the noise 
probability.
∀t : Pin (t is noisy|c) < 1 − e−λ
Proof. The upper bound of the independent noise 
probability follows from the limit limN→∞(1 + x
N
)N
= ex
(see
any comprehensive math book, for example, [5], for the 
convergence equation of the Euler function). With x = −λ, we
obtain:
lim
N→∞
1 −
λ
N
N
= e−λ
For the term noise, we have:
Pin (t is noisy|c) = 1 − 1 −
λ
N
n(t)
Pin (t is noisy|c) is strictly monotonous: The noise of a term
tn is less than the noise of a term tn+1, where tn occurs in
n documents and tn+1 occurs in n + 1 documents. 
Therefore, a term with n = N has the largest noise probability.
For a collection with infinite many documents, the upper
bound of the noise probability for terms tN that occur in all
documents becomes:
lim
N→∞
Pin (tN is noisy) = lim
N→∞
1 − 1 −
λ
N
N
= 1 − e−λ
By applying an independence rather a disjointness 
assumption, we obtain the probability e−1
that a term is not noisy
even if the term does occur in all documents. In the disjoint
case, the noise probability is one for a term that occurs in
all documents.
If we view P(d|c) := λ/N as the average containment,
then λ is large for a term that occurs mostly in large 
documents, and λ is small for a term that occurs mostly in small
documents. Thus, the noise of a term t is large if t occurs in
n(t) large documents and the noise is smaller if t occurs in
small documents. Alternatively, we can assume a constant
containment and a term-dependent occurrence. If we 
assume P(d|c) := 1, then P(t|d) := λ/N can be interpreted as
the average probability that t represents a document. The
common assumption is that the average containment or 
occurrence probability is proportional to n(t). However, here
is additional potential: The statistical laws (see [3] on Luhn
and Zipf) indicate that the average probability could follow
a normal distribution, i. e. small probabilities for small n(t)
and large n(t), and larger probabilities for medium n(t).
For the monotonous case we investigate here, the noise of
a term with n(t) = 1 is equal to 1 − (1 − λ/N) = λ/N and
the noise of a term with n(t) = N is close to 1− e−λ
. In the
next section, we relate the value e−λ
to information theory.
3.3 The probability of a maximal informative
signal
The probability e−1
is special in the sense that a signal
with that probability is a signal with maximal information as
derived from the entropy definition. Consider the definition
of the entropy contribution H(t) of a signal t.
H(t) := P(t) · − ln P(t)
We form the first derivation for computing the optimum.
∂H(t)
∂P(t)
= − ln P(t) +
−1
P(t)
· P(t)
= −(1 + ln P(t))
For obtaining optima, we use:
0 = −(1 + ln P(t))
The entropy contribution H(t) is maximal for P(t) = e−1
.
This result does not depend on the base of the logarithm as
we see next:
∂H(t)
∂P(t)
= − logb P(t) +
−1
P(t) · ln b
· P(t)
= −
1
ln b
+ logb P(t) = −
1 + ln P(t)
ln b
We summarise this result in the following theorem:
Theorem 3. The probability of a maximal 
informative signal: The probability Pmax = e−1
≈ 0.37 is the 
probability of a maximal informative signal. The entropy of a
maximal informative signal is Hmax = e−1
.
Proof. The probability and entropy follow from the 
derivation above.
The complement of the maximal noise probability is e−λ
and we are looking now for a generalisation of the entropy
definition such that e−λ
is the probability of a maximal 
informative signal. We can generalise the entropy definition
by computing the integral of λ+ ln P(t), i. e. this derivation
is zero for e−λ
. We obtain a generalised entropy:
−(λ + ln P(t)) d(P(t)) = P(t) · (1 − λ − ln P(t))
The generalised entropy corresponds for λ = 1 to the 
classical entropy. By moving from disjoint to independent 
documents, we have established a link between the complement
of the noise probability of a term that occurs in all 
documents and information theory. Next, we link independent
documents to probability theory.
4. THE LINK TO PROBABILITY THEORY
We review for independent documents three concepts of
probability theory: possible worlds, binomial distribution
and Poisson distribution.
4.1 Possible Worlds
Each conjunction of document events (for each document,
we consider two document events: the document can be
true or false) is associated with a so-called possible world.
For example, consider the eight possible worlds for three
documents (N = 3).
230
world w conjunction
w7 d1 ∧ d2 ∧ d3
w6 d1 ∧ d2 ∧ ¬d3
w5 d1 ∧ ¬d2 ∧ d3
w4 d1 ∧ ¬d2 ∧ ¬d3
w3 ¬d1 ∧ d2 ∧ d3
w2 ¬d1 ∧ d2 ∧ ¬d3
w1 ¬d1 ∧ ¬d2 ∧ d3
w0 ¬d1 ∧ ¬d2 ∧ ¬d3
With each world w, we associate a probability µ(w), which
is equal to the product of the single probabilities of the 
document events.
world w probability µ(w)
w7
 λ
N
¡3
·
 1 − λ
N
¡0
w6
 λ
N
¡2
·
 1 − λ
N
¡1
w5
 λ
N
¡2
·
 1 − λ
N
¡1
w4
 λ
N
¡1
·
 1 − λ
N
¡2
w3
 λ
N
¡2
·
 1 − λ
N
¡1
w2
 λ
N
¡1
·
 1 − λ
N
¡2
w1
 λ
N
¡1
·
 1 − λ
N
¡2
w0
 λ
N
¡0
·
 1 − λ
N
¡3
The sum over the possible worlds in which k documents are
true and N −k documents are false is equal to the 
probability function of the binomial distribution, since the binomial
coefficient yields the number of possible worlds in which k
documents are true.
4.2 Binomial distribution
The binomial probability function yields the probability
that k of N events are true where each event is true with
the single event probability p.
P(k) := binom(N, k, p) :=
N
k
pk
(1 − p)N −k
The single event probability is usually defined as p := λ/N,
i. e. p is inversely proportional to N, the total number of
events. With this definition of p, we obtain for an infinite
number of documents the following limit for the product of
the binomial coefficient and pk
:
lim
N→∞
N
k
pk
=
= lim
N→∞
N · (N −1) · . . . · (N −k +1)
k!
λ
N
k
=
λk
k!
The limit is close to the actual value for k << N. For large
k, the actual value is smaller than the limit.
The limit of (1−p)N −k follows from the limit limN→∞(1+
x
N
)N
= ex
.
lim
N→∞
(1 − p)N−k
= lim
N→∞
1 −
λ
N
N −k
= lim
N→∞
e−λ
· 1 −
λ
N
−k
= e−λ
Again, the limit is close to the actual value for k << N. For
large k, the actual value is larger than the limit.
4.3 Poisson distribution
For an infinite number of events, the Poisson probability
function is the limit of the binomial probability function.
lim
N→∞
binom(N, k, p) =
λk
k!
· e−λ
P(k) = poisson(k, λ) :=
λk
k!
· e−λ
The probability poisson(0, 1) is equal to e−1
, which is the
probability of a maximal informative signal. This shows
the relationship of the Poisson distribution and information
theory.
After seeing the convergence of the binomial distribution,
we can choose the Poisson distribution as an approximation
of the independent term noise probability. First, we define
the Poisson noise probability:
Definition 4. The Poisson term noise probability:
Ppoi (t is noisy|c) := e−λ
·
n(t)
k=1
λk
k!
For independent documents, the Poisson distribution 
approximates the probability of the disjunction for large n(t),
since the independent term noise probability is equal to the
sum over the binomial probabilities where at least one of
n(t) document containment events is true.
Pin (t is noisy|c) =
n(t)
k=1
n(t)
k
pk
(1 − p)N −k
Pin (t is noisy|c) ≈ Ppoi (t is noisy|c)
We have defined a frequency-based and a Poisson-based 
probability of being noisy, where the latter is the limit of the
independence-based probability of being noisy. Before we
present in the final section the usage of the noise 
probability for defining the probability of being informative, we
emphasise in the next section that the results apply to the
collection space as well as to the the document space.
5. THE COLLECTION SPACE AND THE
DOCUMENT SPACE
Consider the dual definitions of retrieval parameters in
table 1. We associate a collection space D × T with a 
collection c where D is the set of documents and T is the set
of terms in the collection. Let ND := |D| and NT := |T|
be the number of documents and terms, respectively. We
consider a document as a subset of T and a term as a subset
of D. Let nT (d) := |{t|d ∈ t}| be the number of terms that
occur in the document d, and let nD(t) := |{d|t ∈ d}| be the
number of documents that contain the term t.
In a dual way, we associate a document space L × T with
a document d where L is the set of locations (also referred
to as positions, however, we use the letters L and l and not
P and p for avoiding confusion with probabilities) and T is
the set of terms in the document. The document dimension
in a collection space corresponds to the location (position)
dimension in a document space.
The definition makes explicit that the classical notion of
term frequency of a term in a document (also referred to as
the within-document term frequency) actually corresponds
to the location frequency of a term in a document. For the
231
space collection document
dimensions documents and terms locations and terms
document/location
frequency
nD(t, c): Number of documents in which term t
occurs in collection c
nL(t, d): Number of locations (positions) at which
term t occurs in document d
ND(c): Number of documents in collection c NL(d): Number of locations (positions) in 
document d
term frequency nT (d, c): Number of terms that document d 
contains in collection c
nT (l, d): Number of terms that location l contains
in document d
NT (c): Number of terms in collection c NT (d): Number of terms in document d
noise/occurrence P(t|c) (term noise) P(t|d) (term occurrence)
containment P(d|c) (document) P(l|d) (location)
informativeness − ln P(t|c) − ln P(t|d)
conciseness − ln P(d|c) − ln P(l|d)
P(informative) ln(P(t|c))/ ln(P(tmin, c)) ln(P(t|d))/ ln(P(tmin, d))
P(concise) ln(P(d|c))/ ln(P(dmin|c)) ln(P(l|d))/ ln(P(lmin|d))
Table 1: Retrieval parameters
actual term frequency value, it is common to use the 
maximal occurrence (number of locations; let lf be the location
frequency).
tf(t, d):=lf(t, d):=
Pfreq (t occurs|d)
Pfreq (tmax occurs|d)
=
nL(t, d)
nL(tmax , d)
A further duality is between informativeness and 
conciseness (shortness of documents or locations): informativeness
is based on occurrence (noise), conciseness is based on 
containment.
We have highlighted in this section the duality between
the collection space and the document space. We 
concentrate in this paper on the probability of a term to be noisy
and informative. Those probabilities are defined in the 
collection space. However, the results regarding the term noise
and informativeness apply to their dual counterparts: term
occurrence and informativeness in a document. Also, the
results can be applied to containment of documents and 
locations.
6. THE PROBABILITY OF BEING 
INFORMATIVE
We showed in the previous sections that the disjointness
assumption leads to frequency-based probabilities and that
the independence assumption leads to Poisson probabilities.
In this section, we formulate a frequency-based definition
and a Poisson-based definition of the probability of being
informative and then we compare the two definitions.
Definition 5. The frequency-based probability of 
being informative:
Pfreq (t is informative|c) :=
− ln n(t)
N
− ln 1
N
= − logN
n(t)
N
= 1 − logN n(t) = 1 −
ln n(t)
ln N
We define the Poisson-based probability of being 
informative analogously to the frequency-based probability of being
informative (see definition 5).
Definition 6. The Poisson-based probability of 
being informative:
Ppoi (t is informative|c) :=
− ln e−λ
·
Èn(t)
k=1
λk
k!
− ln(e−λ · λ)
=
λ − ln
Èn(t)
k=1
λk
k!
λ − ln λ
For the sum expression, the following limit holds:
lim
n(t)→∞
n(t)
k=1
λk
k!
= eλ
− 1
For λ >> 1, we can alter the noise and informativeness 
Poisson by starting the sum from 0, since eλ
>> 1. Then, the
minimal Poisson informativeness is poisson(0, λ) = e−λ
. We
obtain a simplified Poisson probability of being informative:
Ppoi (t is informative|c) ≈
λ − ln
Èn(t)
k=0
λk
k!
λ
= 1 −
ln
Èn(t)
k=0
λk
k!
λ
The computation of the Poisson sum requires an 
optimisation for large n(t). The implementation for this paper
exploits the nature of the Poisson density: The Poisson 
density yields only values significantly greater than zero in an
interval around λ.
Consider the illustration of the noise and 
informativeness definitions in figure 1. The probability functions 
displayed are summarised in figure 2 where the simplified 
Poisson is used in the noise and informativeness graphs. The
frequency-based noise corresponds to the linear solid curve
in the noise figure. With an independence assumption, we
obtain the curve in the lower triangle of the noise figure. By
changing the parameter p := λ/N of the independence 
probability, we can lift or lower the independence curve. The
noise figure shows the lifting for the value λ := ln N ≈
9.2. The setting λ = ln N is special in the sense that the
frequency-based and the Poisson-based informativeness have
the same denominator, namely ln N, and the Poisson sum
converges to λ. Whether we can draw more conclusions from
this setting is an open question.
We can conclude, that the lifting is desirable if we know
for a collection that terms that occur in relatively few 
doc232
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000
Probabilityofbeingnoisy
n(t): Number of documents with term t
frequency
independence: 1/N
independence: ln(N)/N
poisson: 1000
poisson: 2000
poisson: 1000,2000
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000
Probabilityofbeinginformative
n(t): Number of documents with term t
frequency
independence: 1/N
independence: ln(N)/N
poisson: 1000
poisson: 2000
poisson: 1000,2000
Figure 1: Noise and Informativeness
Probability function Noise Informativeness
Frequency Pfreq Def n(t)/N ln(n(t)/N)/ ln(1/N)
Interval 1/N ≤ Pfreq ≤ 1.0 0.0 ≤ Pfreq ≤ 1.0
Independence Pin Def 1 − (1 − p)n(t)
ln(1 − (1 − p)n(t)
)/ ln(p)
Interval p ≤ Pin < 1 − e−λ
ln(p) ≤ Pin ≤ 1.0
Poisson Ppoi Def e−λ Èn(t)
k=1
λk
k!
(λ − ln
Èn(t)
k=1
λk
k!
)/(λ − ln λ)
Interval e−λ
· λ ≤ Ppoi < 1 − e−λ
(λ − ln(eλ
− 1))/(λ − ln λ) ≤ Ppoi ≤ 1.0
Poisson Ppoi simplified Def e−λ Èn(t)
k=0
λk
k!
(λ − ln
Èn(t)
k=0
λk
k!
)/λ
Interval e−λ
≤ Ppoi < 1.0 0.0 < Ppoi ≤ 1.0
Figure 2: Probability functions
uments are no guarantee for finding relevant documents,
i. e. we assume that rare terms are still relatively noisy. On
the opposite, we could lower the curve when assuming that
frequent terms are not too noisy, i. e. they are considered as
being still significantly discriminative.
The Poisson probabilities approximate the independence
probabilities for large n(t); the approximation is better for
larger λ. For n(t) < λ, the noise is zero whereas for n(t) > λ
the noise is one. This radical behaviour can be smoothened
by using a multi-dimensional Poisson distribution. Figure 1
shows a Poisson noise based on a two-dimensional Poisson:
poisson(k, λ1, λ2) := π · e−λ1
·
λk
1
k!
+ (1 − π) · e−λ2
·
λk
2
k!
The two dimensional Poisson shows a plateau between λ1 =
1000 and λ2 = 2000, we used here π = 0.5. The idea 
behind this setting is that terms that occur in less than 1000
documents are considered to be not noisy (i.e. they are 
informative), that terms between 1000 and 2000 are half noisy,
and that terms with more than 2000 are definitely noisy.
For the informativeness, we observe that the radical 
behaviour of Poisson is preserved. The plateau here is 
approximately at 1/6, and it is important to realise that this
plateau is not obtained with the multi-dimensional Poisson
noise using π = 0.5. The logarithm of the noise is 
normalised by the logarithm of a very small number, namely
0.5 · e−1000
+ 0.5 · e−2000
. That is why the informativeness
will be only close to one for very little noise, whereas for a
bit of noise, informativeness will drop to zero. This effect
can be controlled by using small values for π such that the
noise in the interval [λ1; λ2] is still very little. The setting
π = e−2000/6
leads to noise values of approximately e−2000/6
in the interval [λ1; λ2], the logarithms lead then to 1/6 for
the informativeness.
The indepence-based and frequency-based informativeness
functions do not differ as much as the noise functions do.
However, for the indepence-based probability of being 
informative, we can control the average informativeness by the
definition p := λ/N whereas the control on the 
frequencybased is limited as we address next.
For the frequency-based idf , the gradient is monotonously
decreasing and we obtain for different collections the same
distances of idf -values, i. e. the parameter N does not affect
the distance. For an illustration, consider the distance 
between the value idf(tn+1) of a term tn+1 that occurs in n+1
documents, and the value idf(tn) of a term tn that occurs in
n documents.
idf(tn+1) − idf(tn) = ln
n
n + 1
The first three values of the distance function are:
idf(t2) − idf(t1) = ln(1/(1 + 1)) = 0.69
idf(t3) − idf(t2) = ln(1/(2 + 1)) = 0.41
idf(t4) − idf(t3) = ln(1/(3 + 1)) = 0.29
For the Poisson-based informativeness, the gradient decreases
first slowly for small n(t), then rapidly near n(t) ≈ λ and
then it grows again slowly for large n(t).
In conclusion, we have seen that the Poisson-based 
definition provides more control and parameter possibilities than
233
the frequency-based definition does. Whereas more control
and parameter promises to be positive for the 
personalisation of retrieval systems, it bears at the same time the 
danger of just too many parameters. The framework presented
in this paper raises the awareness about the probabilistic
and information-theoretic meanings of the parameters. The
parallel definitions of the frequency-based probability and
the Poisson-based probability of being informative made
the underlying assumptions explicit. The frequency-based
probability can be explained by binary occurrence, constant
containment and disjointness of documents. Independence
of documents leads to Poisson, where we have to be aware
that Poisson approximates the probability of a disjunction
for a large number of events, but not for a small number.
This theoretical result explains why experimental 
investigations on Poisson (see [7]) show that a Poisson estimation
does work better for frequent (bad, noisy) terms than for
rare (good, informative) terms.
In addition to the collection-wide parameter setting, the
framework presented here allows for document-dependent
settings, as explained for the independence probability. This
is in particular interesting for heterogeneous and structured
collections, since documents are different in nature (size,
quality, root document, sub document), and therefore, 
binary occurrence and constant containment are less 
appropriate than in relatively homogeneous collections.
7. SUMMARY
The definition of the probability of being informative 
transforms the informative interpretation of the idf into a 
probabilistic interpretation, and we can use the idf -based 
probability in probabilistic retrieval approaches. We showed that
the classical definition of the noise (document frequency) in
the inverse document frequency can be explained by three
assumptions: the term within-document occurrence 
probability is binary, the document containment probability is
constant, and the document containment events are disjoint.
By explicitly and mathematically formulating the 
assumptions, we showed that the classical definition of idf does not
take into account parameters such as the different nature
(size, quality, structure, etc.) of documents in a collection,
or the different nature of terms (coverage, importance, 
position, etc.) in a document. We discussed that the absence
of those parameters is compensated by a leverage effect of
the within-document term occurrence probability and the
document containment probability.
By applying an independence rather a disjointness 
assumption for the document containment, we could 
establish a link between the noise probability (term occurrence
in a collection), information theory and Poisson. From the
frequency-based and the Poisson-based probabilities of 
being noisy, we derived the frequency-based and Poisson-based
probabilities of being informative. The frequency-based 
probability is relatively smooth whereas the Poisson probability
is radical in distinguishing between noisy or not noisy, and
informative or not informative, respectively. We showed how
to smoothen the radical behaviour of Poisson with a 
multidimensional Poisson.
The explicit and mathematical formulation of idf - and
Poisson-assumptions is the main result of this paper. Also,
the paper emphasises the duality of idf and tf , collection
space and document space, respectively. Thus, the result
applies to term occurrence and document containment in a
collection, and it applies to term occurrence and position
containment in a document. This theoretical framework is
useful for understanding and deciding the parameter 
estimation and combination in probabilistic retrieval models. The
links between indepence-based noise as document frequency,
probabilistic interpretation of idf , information theory and
Poisson described in this paper may lead to variable 
probabilistic idf and tf definitions and combinations as required
in advanced and personalised information retrieval systems.
Acknowledgment: I would like to thank Mounia Lalmas,
Gabriella Kazai and Theodora Tsikrika for their comments
on the as they said heavy pieces. My thanks also go to the
meta-reviewer who advised me to improve the presentation
to make it less formidable and more accessible for those
without a theoretic bent. This work was funded by a
research fellowship from Queen Mary University of London.
8. REFERENCES
[1] A. Aizawa. An information-theoretic perspective of
tf-idf measures. Information Processing and
Management, 39:45-65, January 2003.
[2] G. Amati and C. J. Rijsbergen. Term frequency
normalization via Pareto distributions. In 24th
BCS-IRSG European Colloquium on IR Research,
Glasgow, Scotland, 2002.
[3] R. K. Belew. Finding out about. Cambridge University
Press, 2000.
[4] A. Bookstein and D. Swanson. Probabilistic models
for automatic indexing. Journal of the American
Society for Information Science, 25:312-318, 1974.
[5] I. N. Bronstein. Taschenbuch der Mathematik. Harri
Deutsch, Thun, Frankfurt am Main, 1987.
[6] K. Church and W. Gale. Poisson mixtures. Natural
Language Engineering, 1(2):163-190, 1995.
[7] K. W. Church and W. A. Gale. Inverse document
frequency: A measure of deviations from poisson. In
Third Workshop on Very Large Corpora, ACL
Anthology, 1995.
[8] T. Lafouge and C. Michel. Links between information
construction and information gain: Entropy and
bibliometric distribution. Journal of Information
Science, 27(1):39-49, 2001.
[9] E. Margulis. N-poisson document modelling. In
Proceedings of the 15th Annual International ACM
SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval, pages 177-189, 1992.
[10] S. E. Robertson and S. Walker. Some simple effective
approximations to the 2-poisson model for
probabilistic weighted retrieval. In Proceedings of the
17th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on
Research and Development in Information Retrieval,
pages 232-241, London, et al., 1994. Springer-Verlag.
[11] S. Wong and Y. Yao. An information-theoric measure
of term specificity. Journal of the American Society
for Information Science, 43(1):54-61, 1992.
[12] S. Wong and Y. Yao. On modeling information
retrieval with probabilistic inference. ACM
Transactions on Information Systems, 13(1):38-68,
1995.
234
