Impedance Coupling in Content-targeted Advertising
Berthier Ribeiro-Neto
Computer Science Department
Federal University of Minas Gerais
Belo Horizonte, Brazil
berthier@dcc.ufmg.br
Marco Cristo
Computer Science Department
Federal University of Minas Gerais
Belo Horizonte, Brazil
marco@dcc.ufmg.br
Paulo B. Golgher
Akwan Information Technologies
Av. Abra˜ao Caram 430 - Pampulha
Belo Horizonte, Brazil
golgher@akwan.com.br
Edleno Silva de Moura
Computer Science Department
Federal University of Amazonas
Manaus, Brazil
edleno@dcc.ufam.edu.br
ABSTRACT
The current boom of the Web is associated with the revenues
originated from on-line advertising. While search-based 
advertising is dominant, the association of ads with a Web
page (during user navigation) is becoming increasingly 
important. In this work, we study the problem of associating
ads with a Web page, referred to as content-targeted 
advertising, from a computer science perspective. We assume that
we have access to the text of the Web page, the keywords
declared by an advertiser, and a text associated with the
advertiser"s business. Using no other information and 
operating in fully automatic fashion, we propose ten strategies
for solving the problem and evaluate their effectiveness. Our
methods indicate that a matching strategy that takes into
account the semantics of the problem (referred to as AAK
for ads and keywords) can yield gains in average precision
figures of 60% compared to a trivial vector-based strategy.
Further, a more sophisticated impedance coupling strategy,
which expands the text of the Web page to reduce 
vocabulary impedance with regard to an advertisement, can yield
extra gains in average precision of 50%. These are first 
results. They suggest that great accuracy in content-targeted
advertising can be attained with appropriate algorithms.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: 
Information Search and Retrieval; I.5.3 [Pattern Recognition]:
Applications-Text processing
General Terms
Algorithms, Experimentation
1. INTRODUCTION
The emergence of the Internet has opened up new 
marketing opportunities. In fact, a company has now the possibility
of showing its advertisements (ads) to millions of people at a
low cost. During the 90"s, many companies invested heavily
on advertising in the Internet with apparently no concerns
about their investment return [16]. This situation radically
changed in the following decade when the failure of many
Web companies led to a dropping in supply of cheap venture
capital and a considerable reduction in on-line advertising
investments [15,16].
It was clear then that more effective strategies for on-line
advertising were required. For that, it was necessary to take
into account short-term and long-term interests of the users
related to their information needs [9,14]. As a consequence,
many companies intensified the adoption of intrusive 
techniques for gathering information of users mostly without
their consent [8]. This raised privacy issues which 
stimulated the research for less invasive measures [16].
More recently, Internet information gatekeepers as, for 
example, search engines, recommender systems, and 
comparison shopping services, have employed what is called paid
placement strategies [3]. In such methods, an advertiser
company is given prominent positioning in advertisement
lists in return for a placement fee. Amongst these methods,
the most popular one is a non-intrusive technique called 
keyword targeted marketing [16]. In this technique, keywords
extracted from the user"s search query are matched against
keywords associated with ads provided by advertisers. A
ranking of the ads, which also takes into consideration the
amount that each advertiser is willing to pay, is computed.
The top ranked ads are displayed in the search result page
together with the answers for the user query.
The success of keyword targeted marketing has motivated
information gatekeepers to offer their advertisement services
in different contexts. For example, as shown in Figure 1,
relevant ads could be shown to users directly in the pages of
information portals. The motivation is to take advantage of
496
the users immediate information interests at browsing time.
The problem of matching ads to a Web page that is browsed,
which we also refer to as content-targeted advertising [1],
is different from that of keyword marketing. In this case,
instead of dealing with users" keywords, we have to use the
contents of a Web page to decide which ads to display.
Figure 1: Example of content-based advertising in
the page of a newspaper. The middle slice of the
page shows the beginning of an article about the
launch of a DVD movie. At the bottom slice, we can
see advertisements picked for this page by Google"s
content-based advertising system, AdSense.
It is important to notice that paid placement 
advertising strategies imply some risks to information gatekeepers.
For instance, there is the possibility of a negative impact
on their credibility which, at long term, can demise their
market share [3]. This makes investments in the quality of
ad recommendation systems even more important to 
minimize the possibility of exhibiting ads unrelated to the user"s
interests. By investing in their ad systems, information 
gatekeepers are investing in the maintenance of their credibility
and in the reinforcement of a positive user attitude towards
the advertisers and their ads [14]. Further, that can 
translate into higher clickthrough rates that lead to an increase in
revenues for information gatekeepers and advertisers, with
gains to all parts [3].
In this work, we focus on the problem of content-targeted
advertising. We propose new strategies for associating ads
with a Web page. Five of these strategies are referred to as
matching strategies. They are based on the idea of matching
the text of the Web page directly to the text of the ads and
its associated keywords. Five other strategies, which we here
introduce, are referred to as impedance coupling strategies.
They are based on the idea of expanding the Web page with
new terms to facilitate the task of matching ads and Web
pages. This is motivated by the observation that there is 
frequently a mismatch between the vocabulary of a Web page
and the vocabulary of an advertisement. We say that there
is a vocabulary impedance problem and that our technique
provides a positive effect of impedance coupling by reducing
the vocabulary impedance. Further, all our strategies rely
on information that is already available to information 
gatekeepers that operate keyword targeted advertising systems.
Thus, no other data from the advertiser is required.
Using a sample of a real case database with over 93,000
ads and 100 Web pages selected for testing, we evaluate our
ad recommendation strategies. First, we evaluate the five
matching strategies. They match ads to a Web page 
using a standard vector model and provide what we may call
trivial solutions. Our results indicate that a strategy that
matches the ad plus its keywords to a Web page, requiring
the keywords to appear in the Web page, provides 
improvements in average precision figures of roughly 60% relative
to a strategy that simply matches the ads to the Web page.
Such strategy, which we call AAK (for ads and keywords),
is then taken as our baseline.
Following we evaluate the five impedance coupling 
strategies. They are based on the idea of expanding the ad and
the Web page with new terms to reduce the vocabulary
impedance between their texts. Our results indicate that it
is possible to generate extra improvements in average 
precision figures of roughly 50% relative to the AAK strategy.
The paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we 
introduce five matching strategies to solve content-targeted
advertising. In section 3, we present our impedance 
coupling strategies. In section 4, we describe our experimental
methodology and datasets and discuss our results. In 
section 5 we discuss related work. In section 6 we present our
conclusions.
2. MATCHING STRATEGIES
Keyword advertising relies on matching search queries to
ads and its associated keywords. Context-based 
advertising, which we address here, relies on matching ads and its
associated keywords to the text of a Web page.
Given a certain Web page p, which we call triggering page,
our task is to select advertisements related to the contents
of p. Without loss of generality, we consider that an 
advertisement ai is composed of a title, a textual description,
and a hyperlink. To illustrate, for the first ad by Google
shown in Figure 1, the title is Star Wars Trilogy Full,
the description is Get this popular DVD free. Free w/ free
shopping. Sign up now, and the hyperlink points to the site
www.freegiftworld.com. Advertisements can be grouped
by advertisers in groups called campaigns, such that a 
campaign can have one or more advertisements.
Given our triggering page p and a set A of ads, a simple
way of ranking ai ∈ A with regard to p is by matching the
contents of p to the contents of ai. For this, we use the vector
space model [2], as discussed in the immediately following.
In the vector space model, queries and documents are 
represented as weighted vectors in an n-dimensional space. Let
wiq be the weight associated with term ti in the query q
and wij be the weight associated with term ti in the 
document dj. Then, q = (w1q, w2q, ..., wiq, ..., wnq) and dj =
(w1j, w2j, ..., wij, ..., wnj) are the weighted vectors used to
represent the query q and the document dj. These weights
can be computed using classic tf-idf schemes. In such schemes,
weights are taken as the product between factors that 
quantify the importance of a term in a document (given by the
term frequency, or tf, factor) and its rarity in the whole 
collection (given by the inverse document factor, or idf, factor),
see [2] for details. The ranking of the query q with regard
to the document dj is computed by the cosine similarity
497
formula, that is, the cosine of the angle between the two
corresponding vectors:
sim(q, dj) =
q • dj
|q| × |dj|
=
Pn
i=1 wiq · wij
qPn
i=1 w2
iq
qPn
i=1 w2
ij
(1)
By considering p as the query and ai as the document, we
can rank the ads with regard to the Web page p. This is our
first matching strategy. It is represented by the function AD
given by:
AD(p, ai) = sim(p, ai)
where AD stands for direct match of the ad, composed by
title and description and sim(p, ai) is computed according
to Eq. (1).
In our second method, we use other source of evidence
provided by the advertisers: the keywords. With each 
advertisement ai an advertiser associates a keyword ki, which
may be composed of one or more terms. We denote the
association between an advertisement ai and a keyword ki
as the pair (ai, ki) ∈ K, where K is the set of associations
made by the advertisers. In the case of keyword targeted
advertising, such keywords are used to match the ads to the
user queries. In here, we use them to match ads to the Web
page p. This provides our second method for ad matching
given by:
KW(p, ai) = sim(p, ki)
where (ai, ki) ∈ K and KW stands for match the ad 
keywords.
We notice that most of the keywords selected by 
advertisers are also present in the ads associated with those 
keywords. For instance, in our advertisement test collection,
this is true for 90% of the ads. Thus, instead of using the
keywords as matching devices, we can use them to emphasize
the main concepts in an ad, in an attempt to improve our
AD strategy. This leads to our third method of ad matching
given by:
AD KW(p, ai) = sim(p, ai ∪ ki)
where (ai, ki) ∈ K and AD KW stands for match the ad and
its keywords.
Finally, it is important to notice that the keyword ki 
associated with ai could not appear at all in the triggering page
p, even when ai is highly ranked. However, if we assume that
ki summarizes the main topic of ai according to an 
advertiser viewpoint, it can be interesting to assure its presence
in p. This reasoning suggests that requiring the occurrence
of the keyword ki in the triggering page p as a condition
to associate ai with p might lead to improved results. This
leads to two extra matching strategies as follows:
ANDKW(p, ai) =

sim(p, ai) if ki p
0 if otherwise
AD ANDKW(p, ai) = AAK(p, ai) =

sim(p, ai ∪ ki) if ki p
0 if otherwise
where (ai, ki) ∈ K, ANDKW stands for match the ad keywords
and force their appearance, and AD ANDKW (or AAK for ads
and keywords) stands for match the ad, its keywords, and
force their appearance.
As we will see in our results, the best among these simple
methods is AAK. Thus, it will be used as baseline for our
impedance coupling strategies which we now discuss.
3. IMPEDANCE COUPLING STRATEGIES
Two key issues become clear as one plays with the 
contenttargeted advertising problem. First, the triggering page 
normally belongs to a broader contextual scope than that of the
advertisements. Second, the association between a good 
advertisement and the triggering page might depend on a topic
that is not mentioned explicitly in the triggering page.
The first issue is due to the fact that Web pages can be
about any subject and that advertisements are concise in
nature. That is, ads tend to be more topic restricted than
Web pages. The second issue is related to the fact that, as
we later discuss, most advertisers place a small number of
advertisements. As a result, we have few terms describing
their interest areas. Consequently, these terms tend to be
of a more general nature. For instance, a car shop probably
would prefer to use car instead of super sport to describe
its core business topic. As a consequence, many specific
terms that appear in the triggering page find no match in
the advertisements. To make matters worst, a page might
refer to an entity or subject of the world through a label
that is distinct from the label selected by an advertiser to
refer to the same entity.
A consequence of these two issues is that vocabularies of
pages and ads have low intersection, even when an ad is
related to a page. We cite this problem from now on as
the vocabulary impedance problem. In our experiments, we
realized that this problem limits the final quality of direct
matching strategies. Therefore, we studied alternatives to
reduce the referred vocabulary impedance.
For this, we propose to expand the triggering pages with
new terms. Figure 2 illustrates our intuition. We already
know that the addition of keywords (selected by the 
advertiser) to the ads leads to improved results. We say that a
keyword reduces the vocabulary impedance by providing an
alternative matching path. Our idea is to add new terms
(words) to the Web page p to also reduce the vocabulary
impedance by providing a second alternative matching path.
We refer to our expansion technique as impedance coupling.
For this, we proceed as follows.
expansion
terms keyword
vocabulary impedance
triggering
page p ad
Figure 2: Addition of new terms to a Web page to
reduce the vocabulary impedance.
An advertiser trying to describe a certain topic in a concise
way probably will choose general terms to characterize that
topic. To facilitate the matching between this ad and our
triggering page p, we need to associate new general terms
with p. For this, we assume that Web documents similar
to the triggering page p share common topics. Therefore,
498
by inspecting the vocabulary of these similar documents we
might find good terms for better characterizing the main
topics in the page p. We now describe this idea using a
Bayesian network model [10,11,13] depicted in Figure 3.
R
D0 D1 Dj Dk
T1 T2 T3 Ti Tm
... ...
... ...
Figure 3: Bayesian network model for our 
impedance coupling technique.
In our model, which is based on the belief network in [11],
the nodes represent pieces of information in the domain.
With each node is associated a binary random variable,
which takes the value 1 to mean that the corresponding 
entity (a page or terms) is observed and, thus, relevant in our
computations. In this case, we say that the information was
observed. Node R represents the page r, a new 
representation for the triggering page p. Let N be the set of the k
most similar documents to the triggering page, including the
triggering page p itself, in a large enough Web collection C.
Root nodes D0 through Dk represent the documents in N,
that is, the triggering page D0 and its k nearest neighbors,
D1 through Dk, among all pages in C. There is an edge
from node Dj to node R if document dj is in N. Nodes
T1 through Tm represent the terms in the vocabulary of C.
There is an edge from node Dj to a node Ti if term ti occurs
in document dj. In our model, the observation of the pages
in N leads to the observation of a new representation of the
triggering page p and to a set of terms describing the main
topics associated with p and its neighbors.
Given these definitions, we can now use the network to
determine the probability that a term ti is a good term for
representing a topic of the triggering page p. In other words,
we are interested in the probability of observing the final
evidence regarding a term ti, given that the new 
representation of the page p has been observed, P(Ti = 1|R = 1).
This translates into the following equation1
:
P(Ti|R) =
1
P(R)
X
d
P(Ti|d)P(R|d)P(d) (2)
where d represents the set of states of the document nodes.
Since we are interested just in the states in which only a
single document dj is observed and P(d) can be regarded as
a constant, we can rewrite Eq. (2) as:
P(Ti|R) =
ν
P(R)
kX
j=0
P(Ti|dj)P(R|dj) (3)
where dj represents the state of the document nodes in
which only document dj is observed and ν is a constant
1
To simplify our notation we represent the probabilities
P(X = 1) as P(X) and P(X = 0) as P(X).
associated with P(dj). Eq. (3) is the general equation to
compute the probability that a term ti is related to the 
triggering page. We now define the probabilities P(Ti|dj) and
P(R|dj) as follows:
P(Ti|dj) = η wij (4)
P(R|dj) =

(1 − α) j = 0
α sim(r, dj) 1 ≤ j ≤ k
(5)
where η is a normalizing constant, wij is the weight 
associated with term ti in the document dj, and sim(p, dj) is
given by Eq. (1), i.e., is the cosine similarity between p and
dj. The weight wij is computed using a classic tf-idf scheme
and is zero if term ti does not occur in document dj. Notice
that P(Ti|dj) = 1 − P(Ti|dj) and P(R|dj) = 1 − P(R|dj).
By defining the constant α, it is possible to determine how
important should be the influence of the triggering page p
to its new representation r. By substituting Eq. (4) and
Eq. (5) into Eq. (3), we obtain:
P(Ti|R) = ρ ((1 − α) wi0 + α
kX
j=1
wij sim(r, dj)) (6)
where ρ = η ν is a normalizing constant.
We use Eq. (6) to determine the set of terms that will
compose r, as illustrated in Figure 2. Let ttop be the top
ranked term according to Eq. (6). The set r is composed
of the terms ti such that P (Ti|R)
P (Ttop|R)
≥ β, where β is a given
threshold. In our experiments, we have used β = 0.05. 
Notice that the set r might contain terms that already occur
in p. That is, while we will refer to the set r as expansion
terms, it should be clear that p ∩ r = ∅.
By using α = 0, we simply consider the terms originally
in page p. By increasing α, we relax the context of the page
p, adding terms from neighbor pages, turning page p into its
new representation r. This is important because, sometimes,
a topic apparently not important in the triggering page offers
a good opportunity for advertising. For example, consider
a triggering page that describes a congress in London about
digital photography. Although London is probably not an
important topic in this page, advertisements about hotels
in London would be appropriate. Thus, adding hotels to
page p is important. This suggests using α > 0, that is,
preserving the contents of p and using the terms in r to
expand p.
In this paper, we examine both approaches. Thus, in our
sixth method we match r, the set of new expansion terms,
directly to the ads, as follows:
AAK T(p, ai) = AAK(r, ai)
where AAK T stands for match the ad and keywords to the
set r of expansion terms.
In our seventh method, we match an expanded page p to
the ads as follows:
AAK EXP(p, ai) = AAK(p ∪ r, ai)
where AAK EXP stands for match the ad and keywords to
the expanded triggering page.
499
To improve our ad placement methods, other external
source that we can use is the content of the page h pointed to
by the advertisement"s hyperlink, that is, its landing page.
After all, this page comprises the real target of the ad and
perhaps could present a more detailed description of the
product or service being advertised. Given that the 
advertisement ai points to the landing page hi, we denote this
association as the pair (ai, hi) ∈ H, where H is the set of
associations between the ads and the pages they point to.
Our eighth method consists of matching the triggering page
p to the landing pages pointed to by the advertisements, as
follows:
H(p, ai) = sim(p, hi)
where (ai, hi) ∈ H and H stands for match the hyperlink
pointed to by the ad.
We can also combine this information with the more 
promising methods previously described, AAK and AAK EXP as 
follows. Given that (ai, hi) ∈ H and (ai, ki) ∈ K, we have our
last two methods:
AAK H(p, ai) =

sim(p, ai ∪ hi ∪ ki) if ki p
0 if otherwise
AAK EXP H(p, ai) =

sim(p ∪ r, ai ∪ hi ∪ ki) if ki (p ∪ r)
0 if otherwise
where AAK H stands for match ads and keywords also 
considering the page pointed by the ad and AAH EXP H stands
for match ads and keywords with expanded triggering page,
also considering the page pointed by the ad.
Notice that other combinations were not considered in this
study due to space restrictions. These other combinations
led to poor results in our experimentation and for this reason
were discarded.
4. EXPERIMENTS
4.1 Methodology
To evaluate our ad placement strategies, we performed
a series of experiments using a sample of a real case ad
collection with 93,972 advertisements, 1,744 advertisers, and
68,238 keywords2
. The advertisements are grouped in 2,029
campaigns with an average of 1.16 campaigns per advertiser.
For the strategies AAK T and AAK EXP, we had to 
generate a set of expansion terms. For that, we used a database
of Web pages crawled by the TodoBR search engine [12]
(http://www.todobr.com.br/). This database is composed
of 5,939,061 pages of the Brazilian Web, under the domain
.br. For the strategies H, AAK H, and AAK EXP H, we also
crawled the pages pointed to by the advertisers. No other
filtering method was applied to these pages besides the 
removal of HTML tags.
Since we are initially interested in the placement of 
advertisements in the pages of information portals, our test 
collection was composed of 100 pages extracted from a 
Brazilian newspaper. These are our triggering pages. They were
crawled in such a way that only the contents of their 
articles was preserved. As we have no preferences for particular
2
Data in portuguese provided by an on-line advertisement
company that operates in Brazil.
topics, the crawled pages cover topics as diverse as politics,
economy, sports, and culture.
For each of our 100 triggering pages, we selected the top
three ranked ads provided by each of our 10 ad placement
strategies. Thus, for each triggering page we select no more
than 30 ads. These top ads were then inserted in a pool
for that triggering page. Each pool contained an average of
15.81 advertisements. All advertisements in each pool were
submitted to a manual evaluation by a group of 15 users.
The average number of relevant advertisements per page
pool was 5.15. Notice that we adopted the same pooling
method used to evaluate the TREC Web-based collection [6].
To quantify the precision of our results, we used 11-point
average figures [2]. Since we are not able to evaluate the
entire ad collection, recall values are relative to the set of
evaluated advertisements.
4.2 Tuning Idf factors
We start by analyzing the impact of different idf factors
in our advertisement collection. Idf factors are important
because they quantify how discriminative is a term in the
collection. In our ad collection, idf factors can be computed
by taking ads, advertisers or campaigns as documents. To
exemplify, consider the computation of ad idf for a term
ti that occurs 9 times in a collection of 100 ads. Then, the
inverse document frequency of ti is given by:
idfi = log
100
9
Hence, we can compute ad, advertiser or campaign idf 
factors. As we observe in Figure 4, for the AD strategy, the best
ranking is obtained by the use of campaign idf, that is, by
calculating our idf factor so that it discriminates campaigns.
Similar results were obtained for all the other methods.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
precision
recall
Campaign idf
Advertiser idf
Ad idf
Figure 4: Precision-recall curves obtained for the
AD strategy using ad, advertiser, and campaign idf
factors.
This reflects the fact that terms might be better 
discriminators for a business topic than for an specific ad. This
effect can be accomplished by calculating the factor relative
to idf advertisers or campaigns instead of ads. In fact, 
campaign idf factors yielded the best results. Thus, they will be
used in all the experiments reported from now on.
500
4.3 Results
Matching Strategies
Figure 5 displays the results for the matching strategies 
presented in Section 2. As shown, directly matching the 
contents of the ad to the triggering page (AD strategy) is not so
effective. The reason is that the ad contents are very noisy.
It may contain messages that do not properly describe the
ad topics such as requisitions for user actions (e.g, visit our
site) and general sentences that could be applied to any
product or service (e.g, we delivery for the whole 
country). On the other hand, an advertiser provided keyword
summarizes well the topic of the ad. As a consequence, the
KW strategy is superior to the AD and AD KW strategies. This
situation changes when we require the keywords to appear
in the target Web page. By filtering out ads whose keywords
do not occur in the triggering page, much noise is discarded.
This makes ANDKW a better alternative than KW. Further, in
this new situation, the contents of the ad becomes useful
to rank the most relevant ads making AD ANDKW (or AAK for
ads and keywords) the best among all described methods.
For this reason, we adopt AAK as our baseline in the next set
of experiments.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
precision
recall
AAK
ANDKW
KW
AD_KW
AD
Figure 5: Comparison among our five matching
strategies. AAK (ads and keywords) is superior.
Table 1 illustrates average precision figures for Figure 5.
We also present actual hits per advertisement slot. We call
hit an assignment of an ad (to the triggering page) that
was considered relevant by the evaluators. We notice that
our AAK strategy provides a gain in average precision of 60%
relative to the trivial AD strategy. This shows that careful
consideration of the evidence related to the problem does
pay off.
Impedance Coupling Strategies
Table 2 shows top ranked terms that occur in a page 
covering Argentinean wines produced using grapes derived from
the Bordeaux region of France. The p column includes the
top terms for this page ranked according to our tf-idf 
weighting scheme. The r column includes the top ranked 
expansion terms generated according to Eq. (6). Notice that the
expansion terms not only emphasize important terms of the
target page (by increasing their weights) such as wines and
Methods Hits 11-pt average
#1 #2 #3 total score gain(%)
AD 41 32 13 86 0.104
AD KW 51 28 17 96 0.106 +1.9
KW 46 34 28 108 0.125 +20.2
ANDKW 49 37 35 121 0.153 +47.1
AD ANDKW (AAK) 51 48 39 138 0.168 +61.5
Table 1: Average precision figures, corresponding to
Figure 5, for our five matching strategies. Columns
labelled #1, #2, and #3 indicate total of hits in
first, second, and third advertisement slots, 
respectively. The AAK strategy provides improvements of
60% relative to the AD strategy.
Rank p r
term score term score
1 argentina 0.090 wines 0.251
2 obtained* 0.047 wine* 0.140
3 class* 0.036 whites 0.091
4 whites 0.035 red* 0.057
5 french* 0.031 grape 0.051
6 origin* 0.029 bordeaux 0.045
7 france* 0.029 acideness* 0.038
8 grape 0.017 argentina 0.037
9 sweet* 0.016 aroma* 0.037
10 country* 0.013 blanc* 0.036
...
35 wines 0.010 
-...
Table 2: Top ranked terms for the triggering page
p according to our tf-idf weighting scheme and top
ranked terms for r, the expansion terms for p, 
generated according to Eq. (6). Ranking scores were
normalized in order to sum up to 1. Terms marked
with ‘*" are not shared by the sets p and r.
whites, but also reveal new terms related to the main topic
of the page such as aroma and red. Further, they avoid
some uninteresting terms such as obtained and country.
Figure 6 illustrates our results when the set r of 
expansion terms is used. They show that matching the ads to
the terms in the set r instead of to the triggering page p
(AAK T strategy) leads to a considerable improvement over
our baseline, AAK. The gain is even larger when we use the
terms in r to expand the triggering page (AAK EXP method).
This confirms our hypothesis that the triggering page could
have some interesting terms that should not be completely
discarded.
Finally, we analyze the impact on the ranking of using the
contents of pages pointed by the ads. Figure 7 displays our
results. It is clear that using only the contents of the pages
pointed by the ads (H strategy) yields very poor results.
However, combining evidence from the pages pointed by the
ads with our baseline yields improved results. Most 
important, combining our best strategy so far (AAK EXP) with
pages pointed by ads (AAK EXP H strategy) leads to superior
results. This happens because the two additional sources
of evidence, expansion terms and pages pointed by the ads,
are distinct and complementary, providing extra and 
valuable information for matching ads to a Web page.
501
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
precision
recall
AAK_EXP
AAK_T
AAK
Figure 6: Impact of using a new representation for
the triggering page, one that includes expansion
terms.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
precision
recall
AAK_EXP_H
AAK_H
AAK
H
Figure 7: Impact of using the contents of the page
pointed by the ad (the hyperlink).
Figure 8 and Table 3 summarize all results described in
this section. In Figure 8 we show precision-recall curves
and in Table 3 we show 11-point average figures. We also
present actual hits per advertisement slot and gains in 
average precision relative to our baseline, AAK. We notice that
the highest number of hits in the first slot was generated by
the method AAK EXP. However, the method with best 
overall retrieval performance was AAK EXP H, yielding a gain in
average precision figures of roughly 50% over the baseline
(AAK).
4.4 Performance Issues
In a keyword targeted advertising system, ads are assigned
at query time, thus the performance of the system is a very
important issue. In content-targeted advertising systems,
we can associate ads with a page at publishing (or 
updating) time. Also, if a new ad comes in we might consider
assigning this ad to already published pages in oﬄine mode.
That is, we might design the system such that its 
performance depends fundamentally on the rate that new pages
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
precision
recall
AAK_EXP_H
AAK_EXP
AAK_T
AAK_H
AAK
H
Figure 8: Comparison among our ad placement
strategies.
Methods Hits 11-pt average
#1 #2 #3 total score gain(%)
H 28 5 6 39 0.026 -84.3
AAK 51 48 39 138 0.168
AAK H 52 50 46 148 0.191 +13.5
AAK T 65 49 43 157 0.226 +34.6
AAK EXP 70 52 53 175 0.242 +43.8
AAK EXP H 64 61 51 176 0.253 +50.3
Table 3: Results for our impedance coupling 
strategies.
are published and the rate that ads are added or modified.
Further, the data needed by our strategies (page crawling,
page expansion, and ad link crawling) can be gathered and
processed oﬄine, not affecting the user experience. Thus,
from this point of view, the performance is not critical and
will not be addressed in this work.
5. RELATED WORK
Several works have stressed the importance of relevance
in advertising. For example, in [14] it was shown that 
advertisements that are presented to users when they are not
interested on them are viewed just as annoyance. Thus,
in order to be effective, the authors conclude that 
advertisements should be relevant to consumer concerns at the
time of exposure. The results in [9] enforce this conclusion
by pointing out that the more targeted the advertising, the
more effective it is.
Therefore it is not surprising that other works have 
addressed the relevance issue. For instance, in [8] it is proposed
a system called ADWIZ that is able to adapt online 
advertisement to a user"s short-term interests in a non-intrusive
way. Contrary to our work, ADWIZ does not directly use
the content of the page viewed by the user. It relies on search
keywords supplied by the user to search engines and on the
URL of the page requested by the user. On the other hand,
in [7] the authors presented an intrusive approach in which
an agent sits between advertisers and the user"s browser 
allowing a banner to be placed into the currently viewed page.
In spite of having the opportunity to use the page"s content,
502
the agent infers relevance based on category information and
user"s private information collected along the time.
In [5] the authors provide a comparison between the 
ranking strategies used by Google and Overture for their keyword
advertising systems. Both systems select advertisements by
matching them to the keywords provided by the user in a
search query and rank the resulting advertisement list 
according to the advertisers" willingness to pay. In 
particular, Google approach also considers the clickthrough rate
of each advertisement as an additional evidence for its 
relevance. The authors conclude that Google"s strategy is better
than that used by Overture. As mentioned before, the 
ranking problem in keyword advertising is different from that of
content-targeted advertising. Instead of dealing with 
keywords provided by users in search queries, we have to deal
with the contents of a page which can be very diffuse.
Finally, the work in [4] focuses on improving search 
engine results in a TREC collection by means of an automatic
query expansion method based on kNN [17]. Such method
resembles our expansion approach presented in section 3.
Our method is different from that presented by [4]. They
expand user queries applied to a document collection with
terms extracted from the top k documents returned as 
answer to the query in the same collection. In our case, we
use two collections: an advertisement and a Web collection.
We expand triggering pages with terms extracted from the
Web collection and then we match these expanded pages to
the ads from the advertisement collection. By doing this, we
emphasize the main topics of the triggering pages, increasing
the possibility of associating relevant ads with them.
6. CONCLUSIONS
In this work we investigated ten distinct strategies for 
associating ads with a Web page that is browsed 
(contenttargeted advertising). Five of our strategies attempt to
match the ads directly to the Web page. Because of that,
they are called matching strategies. The other five 
strategies recognize that there is a vocabulary impedance problem
among ads and Web pages and attempt to solve the problem
by expanding the Web pages and the ads with new terms.
Because of that they are called impedance coupling 
strategies.
Using a sample of a real case database with over 93 
thousand ads, we evaluated our strategies. For the five matching
strategies, our results indicated that planned consideration
of additional evidence (such as the keywords provided by the
advertisers) yielded gains in average precision figures (for
our test collection) of 60%. This was obtained by a 
strategy called AAK (for ads and keywords), which is taken as
the baseline for evaluating our more advanced impedance
coupling strategies.
For our five impedance coupling strategies, the results 
indicate that additional gains in average precision of 50% (now
relative to the AAK strategy) are possible. These were 
generated by expanding the Web page with new terms (obtained
using a sample Web collection containing over five million
pages) and the ads with the contents of the page they point
to (a hyperlink provided by the advertisers).
These are first time results that indicate that high quality
content-targeted advertising is feasible and practical.
7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported in part by the GERINDO 
project, grant MCT/CNPq/CT-INFO 552.087/02-5, by CNPq
grant 300.188/95-1 (Berthier Ribeiro-Neto), and by CNPq
grant 303.576/04-9 (Edleno Silva de Moura). Marco Cristo
is supported by Fucapi, Manaus, AM, Brazil.
8. REFERENCES
[1] The Google adwords. Google content-targeted advertising.
http://adwords.google.com/select/ct_faq.html, November
2004.
[2] R. Baeza-Yates and B. Ribeiro-Neto. Modern Information
Retrieval. Addison-Wesley-Longman, 1st edition, 1999.
[3] H. K. Bhargava and J. Feng. Paid placement strategies for
internet search engines. In Proceedings of the eleventh
international conference on World Wide Web, pages 117-123.
ACM Press, 2002.
[4] E. P. Chan, S. Garcia, and S. Roukos. Trec-5 ad-hoc retrieval
using k nearest-neighbors re-scoring. In The Fifth Text
REtrieval Conference (TREC-5). National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST), November 1996.
[5] J. Feng, H. K. Bhargava, and D. Pennock. Comparison of
allocation rules for paid placement advertising in search
engines. In Proceedings of the 5th international conference on
Electronic commerce, pages 294-299. ACM Press, 2003.
[6] D. Hawking, N. Craswell, and P. B. Thistlewaite. Overview of
TREC-7 very large collection track. In The Seventh Text
REtrieval Conference (TREC-7), pages 91-104, Gaithersburg,
Maryland, USA, November 1998.
[7] Y. Kohda and S. Endo. Ubiquitous advertising on the www:
merging advertisement on the browser. Comput. Netw. ISDN
Syst., 28(7-11):1493-1499, 1996.
[8] M. Langheinrich, A. Nakamura, N. Abe, T. Kamba, and
Y. Koseki. Unintrusive customization techniques for web
advertising. Comput. Networks, 31(11-16):1259-1272, 1999.
[9] T. P. Novak and D. L. Hoffman. New metrics for new media:
toward the development of web measurement standards. World
Wide Web J., 2(1):213-246, 1997.
[10] J. Pearl. Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems:
Networks of plausible inference. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers,
2nd edition, 1988.
[11] B. Ribeiro-Neto and R. Muntz. A belief network model for IR.
In Proceedings of the 19th Annual International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval, pages 253-260, Zurich, Switzerland, August 1996.
[12] A. Silva, E. Veloso, P. Golgher, B. Ribeiro-Neto, A. Laender,
and N. Ziviani. CobWeb - a crawler for the brazilian web. In
Proceedings of the String Processing and Information
Retrieval Symposium (SPIRE"99), pages 184-191, Cancun,
Mexico, September 1999.
[13] H. Turtle and W. B. Croft. Evaluation of an inference
network-based retrieval model. ACM Transactions on
Information Systems, 9(3):187-222, July 1991.
[14] C. Wang, P. Zhang, R. Choi, and M. Daeredita. Understanding
consumers attitude toward advertising. In Eighth Americas
Conference on Information Systems, pages 1143-1148, August
2002.
[15] M. Weideman. Ethical issues on content distribution to digital
consumers via paid placement as opposed to website visibility
in search engine results. In The Seventh ETHICOMP
International Conference on the Social and Ethical Impacts
of Information and Communication Technologies, pages
904-915. Troubador Publishing Ltd, April 2004.
[16] M. Weideman and T. Haig-Smith. An investigation into search
engines as a form of targeted advert delivery. In Proceedings of
the 2002 annual research conference of the South African
institute of computer scientists and information technologists
on Enablement through technology, pages 258-258. South
African Institute for Computer Scientists and Information
Technologists, 2002.
[17] Y. Yang. Expert network: Effective and efficient learning from
human decisions in text categorization and retrieval. In W. B.
Croft and e. C. J. van Rijsbergen, editors, Proceedings of the
17rd annual international ACM SIGIR conference on
Research and development in information retrieval, pages
13-22. Springer-Verlag, 1994.
503
