Ranking Web Objects from Multiple Communities
Le Chen
∗
Le.Chen@idiap.ch
Lei Zhang
leizhang@
microsoft.com
Feng Jing
fengjing@
microsoft.com
Ke-Feng Deng
kefengdeng@hotmail.com
Wei-Ying Ma
wyma@microsoft.com
Microsoft Research Asia
5F, Sigma Center, No. 49, Zhichun Road
Haidian District, Beijing, 100080, P R China
ABSTRACT
Vertical search is a promising direction as it leverages 
domainspecific knowledge and can provide more precise information
for users. In this paper, we study the Web object-ranking
problem, one of the key issues in building a vertical search
engine. More specifically, we focus on this problem in cases
when objects lack relationships between different Web 
communities, and take high-quality photo search as the test bed
for this investigation. We proposed two score fusion methods
that can automatically integrate as many Web communities
(Web forums) with rating information as possible. The 
proposed fusion methods leverage the hidden links discovered
by a duplicate photo detection algorithm, and aims at 
minimizing score differences of duplicate photos in different 
forums. Both intermediate results and user studies show the
proposed fusion methods are practical and efficient solutions
to Web object ranking in cases we have described. Though
the experiments were conducted on high-quality photo 
ranking, the proposed algorithms are also applicable to other
ranking problems, such as movie ranking and music 
ranking.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: 
Information Search and Retrieval; G.2.2 [Discrete 
Mathematics]: Graph Theory; H.3.5 [Information Storage and 
Retrieval]: Online Information Services - Web-based services
General Terms
Algorithms, Experimentation
1. INTRODUCTION
Despite numerous refinements and optimizations, general
purpose search engines still fail to find relevant results for
many queries. As a new trend, vertical search has shown
promise because it can leverage domain-specific knowledge
and is more effective in connecting users with the 
information they want. There are many vertical search engines,
including some for paper search (e.g. Libra [21], Citeseer
[7] and Google Scholar [4]), product search (e.g. Froogle
[5]), movie search [6], image search [1, 8], video search [6],
local search [2], as well as news search [3]. We believe the
vertical search engine trend will continue to grow.
Essentially, building vertical search engines includes data
crawling, information extraction, object identification and
integration, and object-level Web information retrieval (or
Web object ranking) [20], among which ranking is one of the
most important factors. This is because it deals with the
core problem of how to combine and rank objects coming
from multiple communities.
Although object-level ranking has been well studied in
building vertical search engines, there are still some kinds
of vertical domains in which objects cannot be effectively
ranked. For example, algorithms that evolved from 
PageRank [22], PopRank [21] and LinkFusion [27] were proposed
to rank objects coming from multiple communities, but can
only work on well-defined graphs of heterogeneous data.
Well-defined means that like objects (e.g. authors in 
paper search) can be identified in multiple communities (e.g.
conferences). This allows heterogeneous objects to be well
linked to form a graph through leveraging all the 
relationships (e.g. cited-by, authored-by and published-by) among
the multiple communities.
However, this assumption does not always stand for some
domains. High-quality photo search, movie search and news
search are exceptions. For example, a photograph forum
377
website usually includes three kinds of objects: photos, 
authors and reviewers. Yet different photo forums seem to
lack any relationships, as there are no cited-by relationships.
This makes it difficult to judge whether two authors cited
are the same author, or two photos are indeed identical 
photos. Consequently, although each photo has a rating score
in a forum, it is non-trivial to rank photos coming from 
different photo forums. Similar problems also exist in movie
search and news search. Although two movie titles can be
identified as the same one by title and director in different
movie discussion groups, it is non-trivial to combine 
rating scores from different discussion groups and rank movies
effectively. We call such non-trivial object relationship in
which identification is difficult, incomplete relationships.
Other related work includes rank aggregation for the Web
[13, 14], and learning algorithm for rank, such as RankBoost
[15], RankSVM [17, 19], and RankNet [12]. We will contrast
differences of these methods with the proposed methods 
after we have described the problem and our methods.
We will specifically focus on Web object-ranking 
problem in cases that lack object relationships or have with 
incomplete object relationships, and take high-quality photo
search as the test bed for this investigation. In the following,
we will introduce rationale for building high-quality photo
search.
1.1 High-Quality Photo Search
In the past ten years, the Internet has grown to become
an incredible resource, allowing users to easily access a huge
number of images. However, compared to the more than 1
billion images indexed by commercial search engines, actual
queries submitted to image search engines are relatively 
minor, and occupy only 8-10 percent of total image and text
queries submitted to commercial search engines [24]. This
is partially because user requirements for image search are
far less than those for general text search. On the other
hand, current commercial search engines still cannot well
meet various user requirements, because there is no 
effective and practical solution to understand image content.
To better understand user needs in image search, we 
conducted a query log analysis based on a commercial search
engine. The result shows that more than 20% of image
search queries are related to nature and places and daily
life categories. Users apparently are interested in enjoying
high-quality photos or searching for beautiful images of 
locations or other kinds. However, such user needs are not
well supported by current image search engines because of
the difficulty of the quality assessment problem.
Ideally, the most critical part of a search engine - the
ranking function - can be simplified as consisting of two
key factors: relevance and quality. For the relevance 
factor, search in current commercial image search engines 
provide most returned images that are quite relevant to queries,
except for some ambiguity. However, as to quality factor,
there is still no way to give an optimal rank to an image.
Though content-based image quality assessment has been
investigated over many years [23, 25, 26], it is still far from
ready to provide a realistic quality measure in the immediate
future.
Seemingly, it really looks pessimistic to build an image
search engine that can fulfill the potentially large 
requirement of enjoying high-quality photos. Various proliferating
Web communities, however, notices us that people today
have created and shared a lot of high-quality photos on the
Web on virtually any topics, which provide a rich source for
building a better image search engine.
In general, photos from various photo forums are of higher
quality than personal photos, and are also much more 
appealing to public users than personal photos. In addition,
photos uploaded to photo forums generally require rich 
metadata about title, camera setting, category and description to
be provide by photographers. These metadata are actually
the most precise descriptions for photos and undoubtedly
can be indexed to help search engines find relevant results.
More important, there are volunteer users in Web 
communities actively providing valuable ratings for these photos.
The rating information is generally of great value in solving
the photo quality ranking problem.
Motivated by such observations, we have been attempting
to build a vertical photo search engine by extracting rich
metadata and integrating information form various photo
Web forums. In this paper, we specifically focus on how to
rank photos from multiple Web forums.
Intuitively, the rating scores from different photo forums
can be empirically normalized based on the number of 
photos and the number of users in each forum. However, such
a straightforward approach usually requires large manual
effort in both tedious parameter tuning and subjective 
results evaluation, which makes it impractical when there are
tens or hundreds of photo forums to combine. To address
this problem, we seek to build relationships/links between
different photo forums. That is, we first adopt an efficient
algorithm to find duplicate photos which can be considered
as hidden links connecting multiple forums. We then 
formulate the ranking challenge as an optimization problem,
which eventually results in an optimal ranking function.
1.2 Main Contributions and Organization.
The main contributions of this paper are:
1. We have proposed and built a vertical image search 
engine by leveraging rich metadata from various photo
forum Web sites to meet user requirements of searching
for and enjoying high-quality photos, which is 
impossible in traditional image search engines.
2. We have proposed two kinds of Web object-ranking
algorithms for photos with incomplete relationships,
which can automatically and efficiently integrate as
many as possible Web communities with rating 
information and achieves an equal qualitative result 
compared with the manually tuned fusion scheme.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section
2, we present in detail the proposed solutions to the 
ranking problem, including how to find hidden links between
different forums, normalize rating scores, obtain the 
optimal ranking function, and contrast our methods with some
other related research. In Section 3, we describe the 
experimental setting and experiments and user studies conducted
to evaluate our algorithm. Our conclusion and a discussion
of future work is in Section 4.
It is worth noting that although we treat vertical photo
search as the test bed in this paper, the proposed ranking
algorithm can also be applied to rank other content that
includes video clips, poems, short stories, drawings, 
sculptures, music, and so on.
378
2. ALGORITHM
2.1 Overview
The difficulty of integrating multiple Web forums is in
their different rating systems, where there are generally two
kinds of freedom. The first kind of freedom is the rating
interval or rating scale including the minimal and maximal
ratings for each Web object. For example, some forums use
a 5-point rating scale whereas other forums use 3-point or
10-point rating scales. It seems easy to fix this freedom, but
detailed analysis of the data and experiments show that it
is a non-trivial problem.
The second kind of freedom is the varying rating criteria
found in different Web forums. That is, the same score does
not mean the same quality in different forums. Intuitively, if
we can detect same photographers or same photographs, we
can build relationships between any two photo forums and
therefore can standardize the rating criterion by score 
normalization and transformation. Fortunately, we find that
quite a number of duplicate photographs exist in various
Web photo forums. This fact is reasonable when 
considering that photographers sometimes submit a photo to more
than one forum to obtain critiques or in hopes of widespread
publicity. In this work, we adopt an efficient duplicate photo
detection algorithm [10] to find these photos.
The proposed methods below are based on the following
considerations. Faced with the need to overcome a ranking
problem, a standardized rating criterion rather than a 
reasonable rating criterion is needed. Therefore, we can take
a large scale forum as the reference forum, and align other
forums by taking into account duplicate Web objects 
(duplicate photos in this work). Ideally, the scores of duplicate
photos should be equal even though they are in different
forums. Yet we can deem that scores in different 
forumsexcept for the reference forum - can vary in a parametric
space. This can be determined by minimizing the objective
function defined by the sum of squares of the score 
differences. By formulating the ranking problem as an 
optimization problem that attempts to make the scores of duplicate
photos in non-reference forums as close as possible to those
in the reference forum, we can effectively solve the ranking
problem.
For convenience, the following notations are employed.
Ski and ¯Ski denote the total score and mean score of ith Web
object (photo) in the kth Web site, respectively. The total
score refers to the sum of the various rating scores (e.g., 
novelty rating and aesthetic rating), and the mean score refers
to the mean of the various rating scores. Suppose there are
a total of K Web sites. We further use
{Skl
i |i = 1, ..., Ikl; k, l = 1, ..., K; k = l}
to denote the set of scores for Web objects (photos) in kth
Web forums that are duplicate with the lth Web forums,
where Ikl is the total number of duplicate Web objects 
between these two Web sites. In general, score fusion can be
seen as the procedure of finding K transforms
ψk(Ski) = eSki, k = 1, ..., K
such that eSki can be used to rank Web objects from different
Web sites. The objective function described in the above
Figure 1: Web community integration. Each Web
community forms a subgraph, and all communities
are linked together by some hidden links (dashed
lines).
paragraph can then be formulated as
min
{ψk|k=2,...,K}
KX
k=2
Ik1X
i=1
¯wk
i

S1k
i − ψk(Sk1
i )
2
(1)
where we use k = 1 as the reference forum and thus ψ1(S1i) =
S1i. ¯wk
i (≥ 0) is the weight coefficient that can be set 
heuristically according to the numbers of voters (reviewers or 
commenters) in both the reference forum and the non-reference
forum. The more reviewers, the more popular the photo is
and the larger the corresponding weight ¯wk
i should be. In
this work, we do not inspect the problem of how to choose ¯wk
i
and simply set them to one. But we believe the proper use
of ¯wk
i , which leverages more information, can significantly
improve the results.
Figure 1 illustrates the aforementioned idea. The Web
Community 1 is the reference community. The dashed lines
are links indicating that the two linked Web objects are 
actually the same. The proposed algorithm will try to find the
best ψk(k = 2, ..., K), which has certain parametric forms
according to certain models. So as to minimize the cost
function defined in Eq. 1, the summation is taken on all the
red dashed lines.
We will first discuss the score normalization methods in
Section 2.2, which serves as the basis for the following work.
Before we describe the proposed ranking algorithms, we first
introduce a manually tuned method in Section 2.3, which is
laborious and even impractical when the number of 
communities become large. In Section 2.4, we will briefly explain
how to precisely find duplicate photos between Web forums.
Then we will describe the two proposed methods: Linear 
fusion and Non-linear fusion, and a performance measure for
result evaluation in Section 2.5. Finally, in Section 2.6 we
will discuss the relationship of the proposed methods with
some other related work.
2.2 Score Normalization
Since different Web (photo) forums on the Web usually
have different rating criteria, it is necessary to normalize
them before applying different kinds of fusion methods. In
addition, as there are many kinds of ratings, such as 
ratings for novelty, ratings for aesthetics etc, it is reasonable
to choose a common one - total score or average 
scorethat can always be extracted in any Web forum or 
calculated by corresponding ratings. This allows the 
normaliza379
tion method on the total score or average score to be viewed
as an impartial rating method between different Web 
forums.
It is straightforward to normalize average scores by 
linearly transforming them to a fixed interval. We call this
kind of score as Scaled Mean Score. The difficulty, however,
of using this normalization method is that, if there are only
a few users rating an object, say a photo in a photo forum,
the average score for the object is likely to be spammed or
skewed.
Total score can avoid such drawbacks that contain more
information such as a Web object"s quality and popularity.
The problem is thus how to normalize total scores in 
different Web forums. The simplest way may be normalization
by the maximal and minimal scores. The drawback of this
normalization method is it is non robust, or in other words,
it is sensitive to outliers.
To make the normalization insensitive to unusual data,
we propose the Mode-90% Percentile normalization method.
Here, the mode score represents the total score that has been
assigned to more photos than any other total score. And The
high percentile score (e.g.,90%) represents the total score for
which the high percentile of images have a lower total score.
This normalization method utilizes the mode and 90% 
percentile as two reference points to align two rating systems,
which makes the distributions of total scores in different 
forums more consistent. The underlying assumption, for 
example in different photo forums, is that even the qualities of
top photos in different forums may vary greatly and be less
dependent on the forum quality, the distribution of photos
of middle-level quality (from mode to 90% percentile) should
be almost of the same quality up to the freedom which 
reflects the rating criterion (strictness) of Web forums. 
Photos of this middle-level in a Web forum usually occupy more
than 70 % of total photos in that forum.
We will give more detailed analysis of the scores in Section
3.2.
2.3 Manual Fusion
The Web movie forum, IMDB [16], proposed to use a
Bayesian-ranking function to normalize rating scores within
one community. Motivated by this ranking function, we 
propose this manual fusion method: For the kth Web site, we
use the following formula
eSki = αk ·
„
nk · ¯Ski
nk + n∗
k
+
n∗
k · S∗
k
nk + n∗
k
«
(2)
to rank photos, where nk is the number of votes and n∗
k,
S∗
k and αk are three parameters. This ranking function first
takes a balance between the original mean score ¯Ski and a
reference score S∗
k to get a weighted mean score which may
be more reliable than ¯Ski. Then the weighted mean score is
scaled by αk to get the final score fSki.
For n Web communities, there are then about 3n 
parameters in {(αk, n∗
k, S∗
k)|k = 1, ..., n} to tune. Though this
method can achieves pretty good results after careful and
thorough manual tuning on these parameters, when n 
becomes increasingly large, say there are tens or hundreds of
Web communities crawled and indexed, this method will 
become more and more laborious and will eventually become
impractical. It is therefore desirable to find an effective 
fusion method whose parameters can be automatically 
determined.
2.4 Duplicate Photo Detection
We use Dedup [10], an efficient and effective duplicate 
image detection algorithm, to find duplicate photos between
any two photo forums. This algorithm uses hash function
to map a high dimensional feature to a 32 bits hash code
(see below for how to construct the hash code). Its 
computational complexity to find all the duplicate images among
n images is about O(n log n). The low-level visual feature
for each photo is extracted on k × k regular grids. Based
on all features extracted from the image database, a PCA
model is built. The visual features are then transformed to
a relatively low-dimensional and zero mean PCA space, or
29 dimensions in our system. Then the hash code for each
photo is built as follows: each dimension is transformed to
one, if the value in this dimension is greater than 0, and 0
otherwise. Photos in the same bucket are deemed potential
duplicates and are further filtered by a threshold in terms
of Euclidean similarity in the visual feature space.
Figure 2 illustrates the hashing procedure, where visual
features - mean gray values - are extracted on both 6 × 6
and 7×7 grids. The 85-dimensional features are transformed
to a 32-dimensional vector, and the hash code is generated
according to the signs.
Figure 2: Hashing procedure for duplicate photo
dectection
2.5 Score Fusion
In this section, we will present two solutions on score 
fusion based on different parametric form assumptions of ψk
in Eq. 1.
2.5.1 Linear Fusion by Duplicate Photos
Intuitively, the most straightforward way to factor out the
uncertainties caused by the different criterion is to scale, 
rel380
ative to a given center, the total scores of each unreferenced
Web photo forum with respect to the reference forum. More
strictly, we assume ψk has the following form
ψk(Ski) = αkSki + tk, k = 2, ..., K (3)
ψ1(S1i) = S1i (4)
which means that the scores of k(= 1)th forum should be
scaled by αk relative to the center tk
1−αk
as shown in Figure
3.
Then, if we substitute above ψk to Eq. 1, we get the
following objective function,
min
{αk,tk|k=2,...,K}
KX
k=2
Ik1X
i=1
¯wk
i
h
S1k
i − αkSk1
i − tk
i2
. (5)
By solving the following set of functions,
(
∂f
∂αk
= = 0
∂f
∂tk
= 0
, k = 1, ..., K
where f is the objective function defined in Eq. 5, we get
the closed form solution as:
„
αk
tk
«
= A−1
k Lk (6)
where
Ak =
„ P
i ¯wi(Sk1
i )2 P
i ¯wiSk1
iP
i ¯wiSk1
i
P
i ¯wi
«
(7)
Lk =
„ P
i ¯wiS1k
i Sk1
iP
i ¯wiS1k
i
«
(8)
and k = 2, ..., K.
This is a linear fusion method. It enjoys simplicity and
excellent performance in the following experiments.
Figure 3: Linear Fusion method
2.5.2 Nonlinear Fusion by Duplicate Photos
Sometimes we want a method which can adjust scores on
intervals with two endpoints unchanged. As illustrated in
Figure 4, the method can tune scores between [C0, C1] while
leaving scores C0 and C1 unchanged. This kind of fusion
method is then much finer than the linear ones and 
contains many more parameters to tune and expect to further
improve the results.
Here, we propose a nonlinear fusion solution to satisfy
such constraints. First, we introduce a transform:
ηc0,c1,α(x) =
( 
x−c0
c1−c0
α
(c1 − c0) + c0, if x ∈ (c0, c1]
x otherwise
where α > 0. This transform satisfies that for x ∈ [c0, c1],
ηc0,c1,α(x) ∈ [c0, c1] with ηc0,c1,α(c0) = c0 and ηc0,c1,α(c1) =
c1. Then we can utilize this nonlinear transform to adjust
the scores in certain interval, say (M, T],
ψk(Ski) = ηM,T,α(Ski) . (9)
Figure 4: Nonlinear Fusion method. We intent to
finely adjust the shape of the curves in each segment.
Even there is no closed-form solution for the following
optimization problem,
min
{αk|k∈[2,K]}
KX
k=2
Ik1X
i=1
¯wk
i
h
S1k
i − ηM,T,α(Ski)
i2
it is not hard to get the numeric one. Under the same 
assumptions made in Section 2.2, we can use this method to
adjust scores of the middle-level (from the mode point to
the 90 % percentile).
This more complicated non-linear fusion method is 
expected to achieve better results than the linear one. 
However, difficulties in evaluating the rank results block us from
tuning these parameters extensively. The current 
experiments in Section 3.5 do not reveal any advantages over the
simple linear model.
2.5.3 Performance Measure of the Fusion Results
Since our objective function is to make the scores of the
same Web objects (e.g. duplicate photos) between a 
nonreference forum and the reference forum as close as possible,
it is natural to investigate how close they become to each
other and how the scores of the same Web objects change
between the two non-reference forums before and after score
fusion.
Taken Figure 1 as an example, the proposed algorithms
minimize the score differences of the same Web objects in
two Web forums: the reference forum (the Web Community
1) and a non-reference forum, which corresponds to 
minimizing the objective function on the red dashed (hidden)
links. After the optimization, we must ask what happens to
the score differences of the same Web objects in two 
nonreference forums? Or, in other words, whether the scores
of two objects linked by the green dashed (hidden) links
become more consistent?
We therefore define the following performance 
measureδ measure - to quantify the changes for scores of the same
Web objects in different Web forums as
δkl = Sim(Slk
, Skl
) − Sim(Slk
∗ , Skl
∗ ) (10)
381
where Skl
= (Skl
1 , ..., Skl
Ikl
)T
, Skl
∗ = (eSkl
1 , ..., eSkl
Ikl
)T
and
Sim(a, b) =
a · b
||a||||b||
.
δkl > 0 means after score fusion, scores on the same Web
objects between kth and lth Web forum become more 
consistent, which is what we expect. On the contrary, if δkl < 0,
those scores become more inconsistent.
Although we cannot rely on this measure to evaluate our
final fusion results as ranking photos by their popularity and
qualities is such a subjective process that every person can
have its own results, it can help us understand the 
intermediate ranking results and provide insights into the final
performances of different ranking methods.
2.6 Contrasts with Other Related Work
We have already mentioned the differences of the proposed
methods with the traditional methods, such as PageRank
[22], PopRank [21], and LinkFusion [27] algorithms in 
Section 1. Here, we discuss some other related works.
The current problem can also be viewed as a rank 
aggregation one [13, 14] as we deal with the problem of how to
combine several rank lists. However, there are 
fundamental differences between them. First of all, unlike the Web
pages, which can be easily and accurately detected as the
same pages, detecting the same photos in different Web 
forums is a non-trivial work, and can only be implemented by
some delicate algorithms while with certain precision and
recall. Second, the numbers of the duplicate photos from
different Web forums are small relative to the whole photo
sets (see Table 1). In another words, the top K rank lists
of different Web forums are almost disjointed for a given
query. Under this condition, both the algorithms proposed
in [13] and their measurements - Kendall tau distance or
Spearman footrule distance - will degenerate to some 
trivial cases.
Another category of rank fusion (aggregation) methods is
based on machine learning algorithms, such as RankSVM
[17, 19], RankBoost [15], and RankNet [12]. All of these
methods entail some labelled datasets to train a model. In
current settings, it is difficult or even impossible to get these
datasets labelled as to their level of professionalism or 
popularity, since the photos are too vague and subjective to rank.
Instead, the problem here is how to combine several ordered
sub lists to form a total order list.
3. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we carry out our research on high-quality
photo search. We first briefly introduce the newly proposed
vertical image search engine - EnjoyPhoto in section 3.1.
Then we focus on how to rank photos from different Web
forums. In order to do so, we first normalize the scores
(ratings) for photos from different multiple Web forums in
section 3.2. Then we try to find duplicate photos in section
3.3. Some intermediate results are discussed using δ measure
in section 3.4. Finally a set of user studies is carried out
carefully to justify our proposed method in section 3.5.
3.1 EnjoyPhoto: high-quality Photo Search
Engine
In order to meet user requirement of enjoying high-quality
photos, we propose and build a high-quality photo search 
engine - EnjoyPhoto, which accounts for the following three
key issues: 1. how to crawl and index photos, 2. how to
determine the qualities of each photo and 3. how to 
display the search results in order to make the search process
enjoyable. For a given text based query, this system ranks
the photos based on certain combination of relevance of the
photo to this query (Issue 1) and the quality of the photo
(Issue 2), and finally displays them in an enjoyable manner
(Issue 3).
As for Issue 3, we devise the interface of the system 
deliberately in order to smooth the users" process of enjoying
high-quality photos. Techniques, such as Fisheye and slides
show, are utilized in current system. Figure 5 shows the
interface. We will not talk more about this issue as it is not
an emphasis of this paper.
Figure 5: EnjoyPhoto: an enjoyable high-quality
photo search engine, where 26,477 records are 
returned for the query fall in about 0.421 seconds
As for Issue 1, we extracted from a commercial search 
engine a subset of photos coming from various photo forums
all over the world, and explicitly parsed the Web pages 
containing these photos. The number of photos in the data 
collection is about 2.5 million. After the parsing, each photo
was associated with its title, category, description, camera
setting, EXIF data 1
(when available for digital images), 
location (when available in some photo forums), and many
kinds of ratings. All these metadata are generally precise
descriptions or annotations for the image content, which are
then indexed by general text-based search technologies [9,
18, 11]. In current system, the ranking function was 
specifically tuned to emphasize title, categorization, and rating
information.
Issue 2 is essentially dealt with in the following sections
which derive the quality of photos by analyzing ratings 
provided by various Web photo forums. Here we chose six photo
forums to study the ranking problem and denote them as
Web-A, Web-B, Web-C, Web-D, Web-E and Web-F.
3.2 Photo Score Normalization
Detailed analysis of different score normalization 
methods are analyzed in this section. In this analysis, the zero
1
Digital cameras save JPEG (.jpg) files with EXIF 
(Exchangeable Image File) data. Camera settings and scene
information are recorded by the camera into the image file.
www.digicamhelp.com/what-is-exif/
382
0 2 4 6 8 10
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Normalized Score
TotalNumber
(a) Web-A
0 2 4 6 8 10
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
x 10
4
Normalized Score
TotalNumber
(b) Web-B
0 2 4 6 8 10
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
x 10
5
Normalized Score
TotalNumber
(c) Web-C
0 2 4 6 8 10
0
2
4
6
8
10
x 10
4
Normalized Score
TotalNumber
(d) Web-D
0 2 4 6 8 10
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
Normalized Score
TotalNumber
(e) Web-E
0 2 4 6 8 10
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
x 10
4
Normalized Score
TotalNumber
(f) Web-F
Figure 6: Distributions of mean scores normalized
to [0, 10]
scores that usually occupy about than 30% of the total 
number of photos for some Web forums are not currently taken
into account. How to utilize these photos is left for future
explorations.
In Figure 6, we list the distributions of the mean score,
which is transformed to a fixed interval [0, 10]. The 
distributions of the average scores of these Web forums look quite
different. Distributions in Figure 6(a), 6(b), and 6(e) looks
like Gaussian distributions, while those in Figure 6(d) and
6(f) are dominated by the top score. The reason of these
eccentric distributions for Web-D and Web-F lies in their
coarse rating systems. In fact, Web-D and Web-F use 2 or
3 point rating scales whereas other Web forums use 7 or 14
point rating scales. Therefore, it will be problematic if we
directly use these averaged scores. Furthermore the average
score is very likely to be spammed, if there are only a few
users rating a photo.
Figure 7 shows the total score normalization method by
maximal and minimal scores, which is one of our base line
system. All the total scores of a given Web forum are 
normalized to [0, 100] according to the maximal score and 
minimal score of corresponding Web forum. We notice that total
score distribution of Web-A in Figure 7(a) has two larger
tails than all the others. To show the shape of the 
distributions more clearly, we only show the distributions on [0, 25]
in Figure 7(b),7(c),7(d),7(e), and 7(f).
Figure 8 shows the Mode-90% Percentile normalization
method, where the modes of the six distributions are 
normalized to 5 and the 90% percentile to 8. We can see that
this normalization method makes the distributions of total
scores in different forums more consistent. The two proposed
algorithms are all based on these normalization methods.
3.3 Duplicate photo detection
Targeting at computational efficiency, the Dedup 
algorithm may lose some recall rate, but can achieve a high
precision rate. We also focus on finding precise hidden links
rather than all hidden links. Figure 9 shows some duplicate
detection examples. The results are shown in Table 1 and
verify that large numbers of duplicate photos exist in any
two Web forums even with the strict condition for Dedup
where we chose first 29 bits as the hash code. Since there
are only a few parameters to estimate in the proposed fusion
methods, the numbers of duplicate photos shown Table 1 are
0 20 40 60 80 100
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Normalized Score
TotalNumber
(a) Web-A
0 5 10 15 20 25
0
1
2
3
4
5
x 10
4
Normalized Score
TotalNumber
(b) Web-B
0 5 10 15 20 25
0
1
2
3
4
5
x 10
5
Normalized Score
TotalNumber
(c) Web-C
0 5 10 15 20 25
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
x 10
4
Normalized Score
TotalNumber
(d) Web-D
0 5 10 15 20 25
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
Normalized Score
TotalNumber
(e) Web-E
0 5 10 15 20 25
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
x 10
4
Normalized Score
TotalNumber
(f) Web-F
Figure 7: Maxmin Normalization
0 5 10 15
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Normalized Score
TotalNumber
(a) Web-A
0 5 10 15
0
1
2
3
4
5
x 10
4
Normalized Score
TotalNumber
(b) Web-B
0 5 10 15
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
x 10
4
Normalized Score
TotalNumber
(c) Web-C
0 5 10 15
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
x 10
4
Normalized Score
TotalNumber
(d) Web-D
0 5 10 15
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
Normalized Score
TotalNumber
(e) Web-E
0 5 10 15
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
Normalized Score
TotalNumber
(f) Web-F
Figure 8: Mode-90% Percentile Normalization
sufficient to determine these parameters. The last table 
column lists the total number of photos in the corresponding
Web forums.
3.4 δ Measure
The parameters of the proposed linear and nonlinear 
algorithms are calculated using the duplicate data shown in
Table 1, where the Web-C is chosen as the reference Web
forum since it shares the most duplicate photos with other
forums.
Table 2 and 3 show the δ measure on the linear model and
nonlinear model. As δkl is symmetric and δkk = 0, we only
show the upper triangular part. The NaN values in both
tables lie in that no duplicate photos have been detected by
the Dedup algorithm as reported in Table 1.
The linear model guarantees that the δ measures related
Table 1: Number of duplicate photos between each
pair of Web forums
A B C D E F Scale
A 0 316 1,386 178 302 0 130k
B 316 0 14,708 909 8,023 348 675k
C 1,386 14,708 0 1,508 19,271 1,083 1,003k
D 178 909 1,508 0 1,084 21 155k
E 302 8,023 19,271 1,084 0 98 448k
F 0 348 1,083 21 98 0 122k
383
Figure 9: Some results of duplicate photo detection
Table 2: δ measure on the linear model.
Web-B Web-C Web-D Web-E Web-F
Web-A 0.0659 0.0911 0.0956 0.0928 NaN
Web-B - 0.0672 0.0578 0.0791 0.4618
Web-C - - 0.0105 0.0070 0.2220
Web-D - - - 0.0566 0.0232
Web-E - - - - 0.6525
to the reference community should be no less than 0 
theoretically. It is indeed the case (see the underlined numbers
in Table 2). But this model can not guarantee that the δ
measures on the non-reference communities can also be no
less than 0, as the normalization steps are based on 
duplicate photos between the reference community and a 
nonreference community. Results shows that all the numbers in
the δ measure are greater than 0 (see all the non-underlined
numbers in Table 2), which indicates that it is probable that
this model will give optimal results.
On the contrary, the nonlinear model does not guarantee
that δ measures related to the reference community should
be no less than 0, as not all duplicate photos between the
two Web forums can be used when optimizing this model.
In fact, the duplicate photos that lie in different intervals
will not be used in this model. It is these specific duplicate
photos that make the δ measure negative. As a result, there
are both negative and positive items in Table 3, but overall
the number of positive ones are greater than negative ones
(9:5), that indicates the model may be better than the 
normalization only method (see next subsection) which has an
all-zero δ measure, and worse than the linear model.
3.5 User Study
Because it is hard to find an objective criterion to evaluate
Table 3: δ measure on the nonlinear model.
Web-B Web-C Web-D Web-E Web-F
Web-A 0.0559 0.0054 -0.0185 -0.0054 NaN
Web-B - -0.0162 -0.0345 -0.0301 0.0466
Web-C - - 0.0136 0.0071 0.1264
Web-D - - - 0.0032 0.0143
Web-E - - - - 0.214
which ranking function is better, we chose to employ user
studies for subjective evaluations. Ten subjects were invited
to participate in the user study. They were recruited from
nearby universities. As search engines of both text search
and image search are familiar to university students, there
was no prerequisite criterion for choosing students.
We conducted user studies using Internet Explorer 6.0 on
Windows XP with 17-inch LCD monitors set at 1,280 pixels
by 1,024 pixels in 32-bit color. Data was recorded with
server logs and paper-based surveys after each task.
Figure 10: User study interface
We specifically device an interface for user study as shown
in Figure 10. For each pair of fusion methods, participants
were encouraged to try any query they wished. For those
without specific ideas, two combo boxes (category list and
query list) were listed on the bottom panel, where the top
1,000 image search queries from a commercial search engine
were provided. After a participant submitted a query, the
system randomly selected the left or right frame to display
each of the two ranking results. The participant were then
required to judge which ranking result was better of the two
ranking results, or whether the two ranking results were of
equal quality, and submit the judgment by choosing the 
corresponding radio button and clicking the Submit button.
For example, in Figure 10, query sunset is submitted to
the system. Then, 79,092 photos were returned and ranked
by the Minmax fusion method in the left frame and linear
fusion method in the right frame. A participant then 
compares the two ranking results (without knowing the ranking
methods) and submits his/her feedback by choosing answers
in the Your option.
Table 4: Results of user study
Norm.Only Manually Linear
Linear 29:13:10 
14:22:15Nonlinear 29:15:9 12:27:12 6:4:45
Table 4 shows the experimental results, where Linear
denotes the linear fusion method, Nonlinear denotes the
non linear fusion method, Norm. Only means Maxmin
normalization method, Manually means the manually tuned
method. The three numbers in each item, say 29:13:10,
mean that 29 judgments prefer the linear fusion results, 10
384
judgments prefer the normalization only method, and 13
judgments consider these two methods as equivalent.
We conduct the ANOVA analysis, and obtain the 
following conclusions:
1. Both the linear and nonlinear methods are significantly
better than the Norm. Only method with respective
P-values 0.00165(< 0.05) and 0.00073(<< 0.05). This
result is consistent with the δ-measure evaluation 
result. The Norm. Only method assumes that the top
10% photos in different forums are of the same 
quality. However, this assumption does not stand in 
general. For example, a top 10% photo in a top tier photo
forum is generally of higher quality than a top 10%
photo in a second-tier photo forum. This is similar
to that, those top 10% students in a top-tier 
university and those in a second-tier university are generally
of different quality. Both linear and nonlinear fusion
methods acknowledge the existence of such differences
and aim at quantizing the differences. Therefore, they
perform better than the Norm. Only method.
2. The linear fusion method is significantly better than
the nonlinear one with P-value 1.195 × 10−10
. This
result is rather surprising as this more complicated
ranking method is expected to tune the ranking more
finely than the linear one. The main reason for this
result may be that it is difficult to find the best 
intervals where the nonlinear tuning should be carried out
and yet simply the middle part of the Mode-90% 
Percentile Normalization method was chosen. The 
timeconsuming and subjective evaluation methods - user
studies - blocked us extensively tuning these 
parameters.
3. The proposed linear and nonlinear methods perform
almost the same with or slightly better than the 
manually tuned method. Given that the linear/nonlinear
fusion methods are fully automatic approaches, they
are considered practical and efficient solutions when
more communities (e.g. dozens of communities) need
to be integrated.
4. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we studied the Web object-ranking 
problem in the cases of lacking object relationships where 
traditional ranking algorithms are no longer valid, and took
high-quality photo search as the test bed for this 
investigation. We have built a vertical high-quality photo search
engine, and proposed score fusion methods which can 
automatically integrate as many data sources (Web forums) as
possible. The proposed fusion methods leverage the hidden
links discovered by duplicate photo detection algorithm, and
minimize score differences of duplicate photos in different
forums. Both the intermediate results and the user 
studies show that the proposed fusion methods are a practical
and efficient solution to Web object ranking in the 
aforesaid relationships. Though the experiments were conducted
on high-quality photo ranking, the proposed algorithms are
also applicable to other kinds of Web objects including video
clips, poems, short stories, music, drawings, sculptures, and
so on.
Current system is far from being perfect. In order to make
this system more effective, more delicate analysis for the
vertical domain (e.g., Web photo forums) are needed. The
following points, for example, may improve the searching
results and will be our future work: 1. more subtle 
analysis and then utilization of different kinds of ratings (e.g.,
novelty ratings, aesthetic ratings); 2. differentiating various
communities who may have different interests and 
preferences or even distinct culture understandings; 3. 
incorporating more useful information, including photographers" and
reviewers" information, to model the photos in a 
heterogeneous data space instead of the current homogeneous one.
We will further utilize collaborative filtering to recommend
relevant high-quality photos to browsers.
One open problem is whether we can find an objective and
efficient criterion for evaluating the ranking results, instead
of employing subjective and inefficient user studies, which
blocked us from trying more ranking algorithms and tuning
parameters in one algorithm.
5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Bin Wang and Zhi Wei Li for providing Dedup
codes to detect duplicate photos; Zhen Li for helping us
design the interface of EnjoyPhoto; Ming Jing Li, Longbin
Chen, Changhu Wang, Yuanhao Chen, and Li Zhuang etc.
for useful discussions. Special thanks go to Dwight Daniels
for helping us revise the language of this paper.
6. REFERENCES
[1] Google image search. http://images.google.com.
[2] Google local search. http://local.google.com/.
[3] Google news search. http://news.google.com.
[4] Google paper search. http://Scholar.google.com.
[5] Google product search. http://froogle.google.com.
[6] Google video search. http://video.google.com.
[7] Scientific literature digital library.
http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu.
[8] Yahoo image search. http://images.yahoo.com.
[9] R. Baeza-Yates and B. Ribeiro-Neto. Modern
Information Retrieval. New York: ACM Press;
Harlow, England: Addison-Wesley, 1999.
[10] W. Bin, L. Zhiwei, L. Ming Jing, and M. Wei-Ying.
Large-scale duplicate detection for web image search.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Multimedia and Expo, page 353, 2006.
[11] S. Brin and L. Page. The anatomy of a large-scale
hypertextual web search engine. In Computer
Networks, volume 30, pages 107-117, 1998.
[12] C. Burges, T. Shaked, E. Renshaw, A. Lazier,
M. Deeds, N. Hamilton, and G. Hullender. Learning
to rank using gradient descent. In Proceedings of the
22nd international conference on Machine learning,
pages 89 - 96, 2005.
[13] C. Dwork, R. Kumar, M. Naor, and D. Sivakumar.
Rank aggregation methods for the web. In Proceedings
10th International Conference on World Wide Web,
pages 613 - 622, Hong-Kong, 2001.
[14] R. Fagin, R. Kumar, and D. Sivakumar. Comparing
top k lists. SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics,
17(1):134 - 160, 2003.
[15] Y. Freund, R. Iyer, R. E. Schapire, and Y. Singer. An
efficient boosting algorithm for combining preferences.
385
Journal of Machine Learning Research,
4(1):933-969(37), 2004.
[16] IMDB. Formula for calculating the top rated 250 titles
in imdb. http://www.imdb.com/chart/top.
[17] T. Joachims. Optimizing search engines using
clickthrough data. In Proceedings of the eighth ACM
SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge
discovery and data mining, pages 133 - 142, 2002.
[18] J. M. Kleinberg. Authoritative sources in a
hyperlinked environment. Journal of the ACM,
46(5):604-632, 1999.
[19] R. Nallapati. Discriminative models for information
retrieval. In Proceedings of the 25th annual
international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and
development in information retrieval, pages 64 - 71,
2004.
[20] Z. Nie, Y. Ma, J.-R. Wen, and W.-Y. Ma. Object-level
web information retrieval. In Technical Report of
Microsoft Research, volume MSR-TR-2005-11, 2005.
[21] Z. Nie, Y. Zhang, J.-R. Wen, and W.-Y. Ma.
Object-level ranking: Bringing order to web objects.
In Proceedings of the 14th international conference on
World Wide Web, pages 567 - 574, Chiba, Japan,
2005.
[22] L. Page, S. Brin, R. Motwani, and T. Winograd. The
pagerank citation ranking: Bringing order to the web.
In Technical report, Stanford Digital Libraries, 1998.
[23] A. Savakis, S. Etz, and A. Loui. Evaluation of image
appeal in consumer photography. In SPIE Human
Vision and Electronic Imaging, pages 111-120, 2000.
[24] D. Sullivan. Hitwise search engine ratings. Search
Engine Watch Articles, http://searchenginewatch.
com/reports/article.php/3099931, August 23, 2005.
[25] S. Susstrunk and S. Winkler. Color image quality on
the internet. In IS&T/SPIE Electronic Imaging 2004:
Internet Imaging V, volume 5304, pages 118-131,
2004.
[26] H. Tong, M. Li, Z. H.J., J. He, and Z. C.S.
Classification of digital photos taken by photographers
or home users. In Pacific-Rim Conference on
Multimedia (PCM), pages 198-205, 2004.
[27] W. Xi, B. Zhang, Z. Chen, Y. Lu, S. Yan, W.-Y. Ma,
and E. A. Fox. Link fusion: a unified link analysis
framework for multi-type interrelated data objects. In
Proceedings of the 13th international conference on
World Wide Web, pages 319 - 327, 2004.
386
