Automatic Extraction of Titles from General Documents
using Machine Learning
Yunhua Hu1
Computer Science Department
Xi"an Jiaotong University
No 28, Xianning West Road
Xi'an, China, 710049
yunhuahu@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
Hang Li, Yunbo Cao
Microsoft Research Asia
5F Sigma Center,
No. 49 Zhichun Road, Haidian,
Beijing, China, 100080
{hangli,yucao}@microsoft.com
Qinghua Zheng
Computer Science Department
Xi"an Jiaotong University
No 28, Xianning West Road
Xi'an, China, 710049
qhzheng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
Dmitriy Meyerzon
Microsoft Corporation
One Microsoft Way
Redmond, WA,
USA, 98052
dmitriym@microsoft.com
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we propose a machine learning approach to title
extraction from general documents. By general documents, we
mean documents that can belong to any one of a number of
specific genres, including presentations, book chapters, technical
papers, brochures, reports, and letters. Previously, methods have
been proposed mainly for title extraction from research papers. It
has not been clear whether it could be possible to conduct
automatic title extraction from general documents. As a case study,
we consider extraction from Office including Word and
PowerPoint. In our approach, we annotate titles in sample
documents (for Word and PowerPoint respectively) and take them
as training data, train machine learning models, and perform title
extraction using the trained models. Our method is unique in that
we mainly utilize formatting information such as font size as
features in the models. It turns out that the use of formatting
information can lead to quite accurate extraction from general
documents. Precision and recall for title extraction from Word is
0.810 and 0.837 respectively, and precision and recall for title
extraction from PowerPoint is 0.875 and 0.895 respectively in an
experiment on intranet data. Other important new findings in this
work include that we can train models in one domain and apply
them to another domain, and more surprisingly we can even train
models in one language and apply them to another language.
Moreover, we can significantly improve search ranking results in
document retrieval by using the extracted titles.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search
and Retrieval - Search Process; H.4.1 [Information Systems
Applications]: Office Automation - Word processing; D.2.8
[Software Engineering]: Metrics - complexity measures,
performance measures
General Terms
Algorithms, Experimentation, Performance.
1. INTRODUCTION
Metadata of documents is useful for many kinds of document
processing such as search, browsing, and filtering. Ideally,
metadata is defined by the authors of documents and is then used
by various systems. However, people seldom define document
metadata by themselves, even when they have convenient
metadata definition tools [26]. Thus, how to automatically extract
metadata from the bodies of documents turns out to be an
important research issue.
Methods for performing the task have been proposed. However,
the focus was mainly on extraction from research papers. For
instance, Han et al. [10] proposed a machine learning based
method to conduct extraction from research papers. They
formalized the problem as that of classification and employed
Support Vector Machines as the classifier. They mainly used
linguistic features in the model.1
In this paper, we consider metadata extraction from general
documents. By general documents, we mean documents that may
belong to any one of a number of specific genres. General
documents are more widely available in digital libraries, intranets
and the internet, and thus investigation on extraction from them is
sorely needed. Research papers usually have well-formed styles
and noticeable characteristics. In contrast, the styles of general
documents can vary greatly. It has not been clarified whether a
machine learning based approach can work well for this task.
There are many types of metadata: title, author, date of creation,
etc. As a case study, we consider title extraction in this paper.
General documents can be in many different file formats:
Microsoft Office, PDF (PS), etc. As a case study, we consider
extraction from Office including Word and PowerPoint.
We take a machine learning approach. We annotate titles in
sample documents (for Word and PowerPoint respectively) and
take them as training data to train several types of models, and
perform title extraction using any one type of the trained models.
In the models, we mainly utilize formatting information such as
font size as features. We employ the following models: Maximum
Entropy Model, Perceptron with Uneven Margins, Maximum
Entropy Markov Model, and Voted Perceptron.
In this paper, we also investigate the following three problems,
which did not seem to have been examined previously.
(1) Comparison between models: among the models above, which
model performs best for title extraction;
(2) Generality of model: whether it is possible to train a model on
one domain and apply it to another domain, and whether it is
possible to train a model in one language and apply it to another
language;
(3) Usefulness of extracted titles: whether extracted titles can
improve document processing such as search.
Experimental results indicate that our approach works well for
title extraction from general documents. Our method can
significantly outperform the baselines: one that always uses the
first lines as titles and the other that always uses the lines in the
largest font sizes as titles. Precision and recall for title extraction
from Word are 0.810 and 0.837 respectively, and precision and
recall for title extraction from PowerPoint are 0.875 and 0.895
respectively. It turns out that the use of format features is the key
to successful title extraction.
(1) We have observed that Perceptron based models perform
better in terms of extraction accuracies. (2) We have empirically
verified that the models trained with our approach are generic in
the sense that they can be trained on one domain and applied to
another, and they can be trained in one language and applied to
another. (3) We have found that using the extracted titles we can
significantly improve precision of document retrieval (by 10%).
We conclude that we can indeed conduct reliable title extraction
from general documents and use the extracted results to improve
real applications.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we
introduce related work, and in section 3, we explain the
motivation and problem setting of our work. In section 4, we
describe our method of title extraction, and in section 5, we
describe our method of document retrieval using extracted titles.
Section 6 gives our experimental results. We make concluding
remarks in section 7.
2. RELATED WORK
2.1 Document Metadata Extraction
Methods have been proposed for performing automatic metadata
extraction from documents; however, the main focus was on
extraction from research papers.
The proposed methods fall into two categories: the rule based
approach and the machine learning based approach.
Giuffrida et al. [9], for instance, developed a rule-based system for
automatically extracting metadata from research papers in
Postscript. They used rules like titles are usually located on the
upper portions of the first pages and they are usually in the largest
font sizes. Liddy et al. [14] and Yilmazel el al. [23] performed
metadata extraction from educational materials using rule-based
natural language processing technologies. Mao et al. [16] also
conducted automatic metadata extraction from research papers
using rules on formatting information.
The rule-based approach can achieve high performance. However,
it also has disadvantages. It is less adaptive and robust when
compared with the machine learning approach.
Han et al. [10], for instance, conducted metadata extraction with
the machine learning approach. They viewed the problem as that
of classifying the lines in a document into the categories of
metadata and proposed using Support Vector Machines as the
classifier. They mainly used linguistic information as features.
They reported high extraction accuracy from research papers in
terms of precision and recall.
2.2 Information Extraction
Metadata extraction can be viewed as an application of
information extraction, in which given a sequence of instances, we
identify a subsequence that represents information in which we
are interested. Hidden Markov Model [6], Maximum Entropy
Model [1, 4], Maximum Entropy Markov Model [17], Support
Vector Machines [3], Conditional Random Field [12], and Voted
Perceptron [2] are widely used information extraction models.
Information extraction has been applied, for instance, to 
part-ofspeech tagging [20], named entity recognition [25] and table
extraction [19].
2.3 Search Using Title Information
Title information is useful for document retrieval.
In the system Citeseer, for instance, Giles et al. managed to
extract titles from research papers and make use of the extracted
titles in metadata search of papers [8].
In web search, the title fields (i.e., file properties) and anchor texts
of web pages (HTML documents) can be viewed as ‘titles" of the
pages [5]. Many search engines seem to utilize them for web page
retrieval [7, 11, 18, 22]. Zhang et al., found that web pages with
well-defined metadata are more easily retrieved than those without
well-defined metadata [24].
To the best of our knowledge, no research has been conducted on
using extracted titles from general documents (e.g., Office
documents) for search of the documents.
146
3. MOTIVATION AND PROBLEM
SETTING
We consider the issue of automatically extracting titles from
general documents.
By general documents, we mean documents that belong to one of
any number of specific genres. The documents can be
presentations, books, book chapters, technical papers, brochures,
reports, memos, specifications, letters, announcements, or resumes.
General documents are more widely available in digital libraries,
intranets, and internet, and thus investigation on title extraction
from them is sorely needed.
Figure 1 shows an estimate on distributions of file formats on
intranet and internet [15]. Office and PDF are the main file
formats on the intranet. Even on the internet, the documents in the
formats are still not negligible, given its extremely large size. In
this paper, without loss of generality, we take Office documents as
an example.
Figure 1. Distributions of file formats in internet and intranet.
For Office documents, users can define titles as file properties
using a feature provided by Office. We found in an experiment,
however, that users seldom use the feature and thus titles in file
properties are usually very inaccurate. That is to say, titles in file
properties are usually inconsistent with the ‘true" titles in the file
bodies that are created by the authors and are visible to readers.
We collected 6,000 Word and 6,000 PowerPoint documents from
an intranet and the internet and examined how many titles in the
file properties are correct. We found that surprisingly the accuracy
was only 0.265 (cf., Section 6.3 for details). A number of reasons
can be considered. For example, if one creates a new file by
copying an old file, then the file property of the new file will also
be copied from the old file.
In another experiment, we found that Google uses the titles in file
properties of Office documents in search and browsing, but the
titles are not very accurate. We created 50 queries to search Word
and PowerPoint documents and examined the top 15 results of
each query returned by Google. We found that nearly all the titles
presented in the search results were from the file properties of the
documents. However, only 0.272 of them were correct.
Actually, ‘true" titles usually exist at the beginnings of the bodies
of documents. If we can accurately extract the titles from the
bodies of documents, then we can exploit reliable title information
in document processing. This is exactly the problem we address in
this paper.
More specifically, given a Word document, we are to extract the
title from the top region of the first page. Given a PowerPoint
document, we are to extract the title from the first slide. A title
sometimes consists of a main title and one or two subtitles. We
only consider extraction of the main title.
As baselines for title extraction, we use that of always using the
first lines as titles and that of always using the lines with largest
font sizes as titles.
Figure 2. Title extraction from Word document.
Figure 3. Title extraction from PowerPoint document.
Next, we define a ‘specification" for human judgments in title data
annotation. The annotated data will be used in training and testing
of the title extraction methods.
Summary of the specification: The title of a document should be
identified on the basis of common sense, if there is no difficulty in
the identification. However, there are many cases in which the
identification is not easy. There are some rules defined in the
specification that guide identification for such cases. The rules
include a title is usually in consecutive lines in the same format,
a document can have no title, titles in images are not
considered, a title should not contain words like ‘draft",
147
‘whitepaper", etc, if it is difficult to determine which is the title,
select the one in the largest font size, and if it is still difficult to
determine which is the title, select the first candidate. (The
specification covers all the cases we have encountered in data
annotation.)
Figures 2 and 3 show examples of Office documents from which
we conduct title extraction. In Figure 2, ‘Differences in Win32
API Implementations among Windows Operating Systems" is the
title of the Word document. ‘Microsoft Windows" on the top of
this page is a picture and thus is ignored. In Figure 3, ‘Building
Competitive Advantages through an Agile Infrastructure" is the
title of the PowerPoint document.
We have developed a tool for annotation of titles by human
annotators. Figure 4 shows a snapshot of the tool.
Figure 4. Title annotation tool.
4. TITLE EXTRACTION METHOD
4.1 Outline
Title extraction based on machine learning consists of training and
extraction. The same pre-processing step occurs before training
and extraction.
During pre-processing, from the top region of the first page of a
Word document or the first slide of a PowerPoint document a
number of units for processing are extracted. If a line (lines are
separated by ‘return" symbols) only has a single format, then the
line will become a unit. If a line has several parts and each of
them has its own format, then each part will become a unit. Each
unit will be treated as an instance in learning. A unit contains not
only content information (linguistic information) but also
formatting information. The input to pre-processing is a document
and the output of pre-processing is a sequence of units (instances).
Figure 5 shows the units obtained from the document in Figure 2.
Figure 5. Example of units.
In learning, the input is sequences of units where each sequence
corresponds to a document. We take labeled units (labeled as
title_begin, title_end, or other) in the sequences as training data
and construct models for identifying whether a unit is title_begin
title_end, or other. We employ four types of models: Perceptron,
Maximum Entropy (ME), Perceptron Markov Model (PMM), and
Maximum Entropy Markov Model (MEMM).
In extraction, the input is a sequence of units from one document.
We employ one type of model to identify whether a unit is
title_begin, title_end, or other. We then extract units from the unit
labeled with ‘title_begin" to the unit labeled with ‘title_end". The
result is the extracted title of the document.
The unique characteristic of our approach is that we mainly utilize
formatting information for title extraction. Our assumption is that
although general documents vary in styles, their formats have
certain patterns and we can learn and utilize the patterns for title
extraction. This is in contrast to the work by Han et al., in which
only linguistic features are used for extraction from research
papers.
4.2 Models
The four models actually can be considered in the same metadata
extraction framework. That is why we apply them together to our
current problem.
Each input is a sequence of instances kxxx L21 together with a
sequence of labels kyyy L21 . ix and iy represents an instance
and its label, respectively ( ki ,,2,1 L= ). Recall that an instance
here represents a unit. A label represents title_begin, title_end, or
other. Here, k is the number of units in a document.
In learning, we train a model which can be generally denoted as a
conditional probability distribution )|( 11 kk XXYYP LL where
iX and iY denote random variables taking instance ix and label
iy as values, respectively ( ki ,,2,1 L= ).
Learning Tool
Extraction Tool
21121
2222122221
1121111211
nknnknn
kk
kk
yyyxxx
yyyxxx
yyyxxx
LL
LL
LL
LL
→
→
→
)|(maxarg 11 mkmmkm xxyyP LL
)|( 11 kk XXYYP LL
Conditional
Distribution
mkmm xxx L21
Figure 6. Metadata extraction model.
We can make assumptions about the general model in order to
make it simple enough for training.
148
For example, we can assume that kYY ,,1 L are independent of
each other given kXX ,,1 L . Thus, we have
)|()|(
)|(
11
11
kk
kk
XYPXYP
XXYYP
L
LL
=
In this way, we decompose the model into a number of classifiers.
We train the classifiers locally using the labeled data. As the
classifier, we employ the Perceptron or Maximum Entropy model.
We can also assume that the first order Markov property holds for
kYY ,,1 L given kXX ,,1 L . Thus, we have
)|()|(
)|(
111
11
kkk
kk
XYYPXYP
XXYYP
−= L
LL
Again, we obtain a number of classifiers. However, the classifiers
are conditioned on the previous label. When we employ the
Percepton or Maximum Entropy model as a classifier, the models
become a Percepton Markov Model or Maximum Entropy Markov
Model, respectively. That is to say, the two models are more
precise.
In extraction, given a new sequence of instances, we resort to one
of the constructed models to assign a sequence of labels to the
sequence of instances, i.e., perform extraction.
For Perceptron and ME, we assign labels locally and combine the
results globally later using heuristics. Specifically, we first
identify the most likely title_begin. Then we find the most likely
title_end within three units after the title_begin. Finally, we
extract as a title the units between the title_begin and the title_end.
For PMM and MEMM, we employ the Viterbi algorithm to find
the globally optimal label sequence.
In this paper, for Perceptron, we actually employ an improved
variant of it, called Perceptron with Uneven Margin [13]. This
version of Perceptron can work well especially when the number
of positive instances and the number of negative instances differ
greatly, which is exactly the case in our problem.
We also employ an improved version of Perceptron Markov
Model in which the Perceptron model is the so-called Voted
Perceptron [2]. In addition, in training, the parameters of the
model are updated globally rather than locally.
4.3 Features
There are two types of features: format features and linguistic
features. We mainly use the former. The features are used for both
the title-begin and the title-end classifiers.
4.3.1 Format Features
Font Size: There are four binary features that represent the
normalized font size of the unit (recall that a unit has only one
type of font).
If the font size of the unit is the largest in the document, then the
first feature will be 1, otherwise 0. If the font size is the smallest
in the document, then the fourth feature will be 1, otherwise 0. If
the font size is above the average font size and not the largest in
the document, then the second feature will be 1, otherwise 0. If the
font size is below the average font size and not the smallest, the
third feature will be 1, otherwise 0.
It is necessary to conduct normalization on font sizes. For
example, in one document the largest font size might be ‘12pt",
while in another the smallest one might be ‘18pt".
Boldface: This binary feature represents whether or not the
current unit is in boldface.
Alignment: There are four binary features that respectively
represent the location of the current unit: ‘left", ‘center", ‘right",
and ‘unknown alignment".
The following format features with respect to ‘context" play an
important role in title extraction.
Empty Neighboring Unit: There are two binary features that
represent, respectively, whether or not the previous unit and the
current unit are blank lines.
Font Size Change: There are two binary features that represent,
respectively, whether or not the font size of the previous unit and
the font size of the next unit differ from that of the current unit.
Alignment Change: There are two binary features that represent,
respectively, whether or not the alignment of the previous unit and
the alignment of the next unit differ from that of the current one.
Same Paragraph: There are two binary features that represent,
respectively, whether or not the previous unit and the next unit are
in the same paragraph as the current unit.
4.3.2 Linguistic Features
The linguistic features are based on key words.
Positive Word: This binary feature represents whether or not the
current unit begins with one of the positive words. The positive
words include ‘title:", ‘subject:", ‘subject line:" For example, in
some documents the lines of titles and authors have the same
formats. However, if lines begin with one of the positive words,
then it is likely that they are title lines.
Negative Word: This binary feature represents whether or not the
current unit begins with one of the negative words. The negative
words include ‘To", ‘By", ‘created by", ‘updated by", etc.
There are more negative words than positive words. The above
linguistic features are language dependent.
Word Count: A title should not be too long. We heuristically
create four intervals: [1, 2], [3, 6], [7, 9] and [9, ∞) and define one
feature for each interval. If the number of words in a title falls into
an interval, then the corresponding feature will be 1; otherwise 0.
Ending Character: This feature represents whether the unit ends
with ‘:", ‘-", or other special characters. A title usually does not
end with such a character.
5. DOCUMENT RETRIEVAL METHOD
We describe our method of document retrieval using extracted
titles.
Typically, in information retrieval a document is split into a
number of fields including body, title, and anchor text. A ranking
function in search can use different weights for different fields of
149
the document. Also, titles are typically assigned high weights,
indicating that they are important for document retrieval. As
explained previously, our experiment has shown that a significant
number of documents actually have incorrect titles in the file
properties, and thus in addition of using them we use the extracted
titles as one more field of the document. By doing this, we attempt
to improve the overall precision.
In this paper, we employ a modification of BM25 that allows field
weighting [21]. As fields, we make use of body, title, extracted
title and anchor. First, for each term in the query we count the
term frequency in each field of the document; each field
frequency is then weighted according to the corresponding weight
parameter:
∑=
f
tfft tfwwtf
Similarly, we compute the document length as a weighted sum of
lengths of each field. Average document length in the corpus
becomes the average of all weighted document lengths.
∑=
f
ff dlwwdl
In our experiments we used 75.0,8.11 == bk . Weight for content
was 1.0, title was 10.0, anchor was 10.0, and extracted title was
5.0.
6. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
6.1 Data Sets and Evaluation Measures
We used two data sets in our experiments.
First, we downloaded and randomly selected 5,000 Word
documents and 5,000 PowerPoint documents from an intranet of
Microsoft. We call it MS hereafter.
Second, we downloaded and randomly selected 500 Word and 500
PowerPoint documents from the DotGov and DotCom domains on
the internet, respectively.
Figure 7 shows the distributions of the genres of the documents.
We see that the documents are indeed ‘general documents" as we
define them.
Figure 7. Distributions of document genres.
Third, a data set in Chinese was also downloaded from the internet.
It includes 500 Word documents and 500 PowerPoint documents
in Chinese.
We manually labeled the titles of all the documents, on the basis
of our specification.
Not all the documents in the two data sets have titles. Table 1
shows the percentages of the documents having titles. We see that
DotCom and DotGov have more PowerPoint documents with titles
than MS. This might be because PowerPoint documents published
on the internet are more formal than those on the intranet.
Table 1. The portion of documents with titles
Domain
Type
MS DotCom DotGov
Word 75.7% 77.8% 75.6%
PowerPoint 82.1% 93.4% 96.4%
In our experiments, we conducted evaluations on title extraction in
terms of precision, recall, and F-measure. The evaluation
measures are defined as follows:
Precision: P = A / ( A + B )
Recall: R = A / ( A + C )
F-measure: F1 = 2PR / ( P + R )
Here, A, B, C, and D are numbers of documents as those defined
in Table 2.
Table 2. Contingence table with regard to title extraction
Is title Is not title
Extracted A B
Not extracted C D
6.2 Baselines
We test the accuracies of the two baselines described in section
4.2. They are denoted as ‘largest font size" and ‘first line"
respectively.
6.3 Accuracy of Titles in File Properties
We investigate how many titles in the file properties of the
documents are reliable. We view the titles annotated by humans as
true titles and test how many titles in the file properties can
approximately match with the true titles. We use Edit Distance to
conduct the approximate match. (Approximate match is only used
in this evaluation). This is because sometimes human annotated
titles can be slightly different from the titles in file properties on
the surface, e.g., contain extra spaces).
Given string A and string B:
if ( (D == 0) or ( D / ( La + Lb ) < θ ) ) then string A = string B
D: Edit Distance between string A and string B
La: length of string A
Lb: length of string B
θ: 0.1
∑ ×
++−
+
=
t
t
n
N
wtf
avwdl
wdl
bbk
kwtf
FBM )log(
))1((
)1(
25
1
1
150
Table 3. Accuracies of titles in file properties
File Type Domain Precision Recall F1
MS 0.299 0.311 0.305
DotCom 0.210 0.214 0.212Word
DotGov 0.182 0.177 0.180
MS 0.229 0.245 0.237
DotCom 0.185 0.186 0.186PowerPoint
DotGov 0.180 0.182 0.181
6.4 Comparison with Baselines
We conducted title extraction from the first data set (Word and
PowerPoint in MS). As the model, we used Perceptron.
We conduct 4-fold cross validation. Thus, all the results reported
here are those averaged over 4 trials. Tables 4 and 5 show the
results. We see that Perceptron significantly outperforms the
baselines. In the evaluation, we use exact matching between the
true titles annotated by humans and the extracted titles.
Table 4. Accuracies of title extraction with Word
Precision Recall F1
Model Perceptron 0.810 0.837 0.823
Largest font size 0.700 0.758 0.727
Baselines
First line 0.707 0.767 0.736
Table 5. Accuracies of title extraction with PowerPoint
Precision Recall F1
Model Perceptron 0.875 0. 895 0.885
Largest font size 0.844 0.887 0.865
Baselines
First line 0.639 0.671 0.655
We see that the machine learning approach can achieve good
performance in title extraction. For Word documents both
precision and recall of the approach are 8 percent higher than
those of the baselines. For PowerPoint both precision and recall of
the approach are 2 percent higher than those of the baselines.
We conduct significance tests. The results are shown in Table 6.
Here, ‘Largest" denotes the baseline of using the largest font size,
‘First" denotes the baseline of using the first line. The results
indicate that the improvements of machine learning over baselines
are statistically significant (in the sense p-value < 0.05)
Table 6. Sign test results
Documents Type Sign test between p-value
Perceptron vs. Largest 3.59e-26
Word
Perceptron vs. First 7.12e-10
Perceptron vs. Largest 0.010
PowerPoint
Perceptron vs. First 5.13e-40
We see, from the results, that the two baselines can work well for
title extraction, suggesting that font size and position information
are most useful features for title extraction. However, it is also
obvious that using only these two features is not enough. There
are cases in which all the lines have the same font size (i.e., the
largest font size), or cases in which the lines with the largest font
size only contain general descriptions like ‘Confidential", ‘White
paper", etc. For those cases, the ‘largest font size" method cannot
work well. For similar reasons, the ‘first line" method alone
cannot work well, either. With the combination of different
features (evidence in title judgment), Perceptron can outperform
Largest and First.
We investigate the performance of solely using linguistic features.
We found that it does not work well. It seems that the format
features play important roles and the linguistic features are
supplements..
Figure 8. An example Word document.
Figure 9. An example PowerPoint document.
We conducted an error analysis on the results of Perceptron. We
found that the errors fell into three categories. (1) About one third
of the errors were related to ‘hard cases". In these documents, the
layouts of the first pages were difficult to understand, even for
humans. Figure 8 and 9 shows examples. (2) Nearly one fourth of
the errors were from the documents which do not have true titles
but only contain bullets. Since we conduct extraction from the top
regions, it is difficult to get rid of these errors with the current
approach. (3). Confusions between main titles and subtitles were
another type of error. Since we only labeled the main titles as
titles, the extractions of both titles were considered incorrect. This
type of error does little harm to document processing like search,
however.
6.5 Comparison between Models
To compare the performance of different machine learning models,
we conducted another experiment. Again, we perform 4-fold cross
151
validation on the first data set (MS). Table 7, 8 shows the results
of all the four models.
It turns out that Perceptron and PMM perform the best, followed
by MEMM, and ME performs the worst. In general, the
Markovian models perform better than or as well as their classifier
counterparts. This seems to be because the Markovian models are
trained globally, while the classifiers are trained locally. The
Perceptron based models perform better than the ME based
counterparts. This seems to be because the Perceptron based
models are created to make better classifications, while ME
models are constructed for better prediction.
Table 7. Comparison between different learning models for
title extraction with Word
Model Precision Recall F1
Perceptron 0.810 0.837 0.823
MEMM 0.797 0.824 0.810
PMM 0.827 0.823 0.825
ME 0.801 0.621 0.699
Table 8. Comparison between different learning models for
title extraction with PowerPoint
Model Precision Recall F1
Perceptron 0.875 0. 895 0. 885
MEMM 0.841 0.861 0.851
PMM 0.873 0.896 0.885
ME 0.753 0.766 0.759
6.6 Domain Adaptation
We apply the model trained with the first data set (MS) to the
second data set (DotCom and DotGov). Tables 9-12 show the
results.
Table 9. Accuracies of title extraction with Word in DotGov
Precision Recall F1
Model Perceptron 0.716 0.759 0.737
Largest font size 0.549 0.619 0.582Baselines
First line 0.462 0.521 0.490
Table 10. Accuracies of title extraction with PowerPoint in
DotGov
Precision Recall F1
Model Perceptron 0.900 0.906 0.903
Largest font size 0.871 0.888 0.879Baselines
First line 0.554 0.564 0.559
Table 11. Accuracies of title extraction with Word in DotCom
Precisio
n
Recall F1
Model Perceptron 0.832 0.880 0.855
Largest font size 0.676 0.753 0.712Baselines
First line 0.577 0.643 0.608
Table 12. Performance of PowerPoint document title
extraction in DotCom
Precisio
n
Recall F1
Model Perceptron 0.910 0.903 0.907
Largest font size 0.864 0.886 0.875Baselines
First line 0.570 0.585 0.577
From the results, we see that the models can be adapted to
different domains well. There is almost no drop in accuracy. The
results indicate that the patterns of title formats exist across
different domains, and it is possible to construct a domain
independent model by mainly using formatting information.
6.7 Language Adaptation
We apply the model trained with the data in English (MS) to the
data set in Chinese.
Tables 13-14 show the results.
Table 13. Accuracies of title extraction with Word in Chinese
Precision Recall F1
Model Perceptron 0.817 0.805 0.811
Largest font size 0.722 0.755 0.738Baselines
First line 0.743 0.777 0.760
Table 14. Accuracies of title extraction with PowerPoint in
Chinese
Precision Recall F1
Model Perceptron 0.766 0.812 0.789
Largest font size 0.753 0.813 0.782Baselines
First line 0.627 0.676 0.650
We see that the models can be adapted to a different language.
There are only small drops in accuracy. Obviously, the linguistic
features do not work for Chinese, but the effect of not using them
is negligible. The results indicate that the patterns of title formats
exist across different languages.
From the domain adaptation and language adaptation results, we
conclude that the use of formatting information is the key to a
successful extraction from general documents.
6.8 Search with Extracted Titles
We performed experiments on using title extraction for document
retrieval. As a baseline, we employed BM25 without using
extracted titles. The ranking mechanism was as described in
Section 5. The weights were heuristically set. We did not conduct
optimization on the weights.
The evaluation was conducted on a corpus of 1.3 M documents
crawled from the intranet of Microsoft using 100 evaluation
queries obtained from this intranet"s search engine query logs. 50
queries were from the most popular set, while 50 queries other
were chosen randomly. Users were asked to provide judgments of
the degree of document relevance from a scale of 1to 5 (1
meaning detrimental, 2 - bad, 3 - fair, 4 - good and 5 - excellent).
152
Figure 10 shows the results. In the chart two sets of precision
results were obtained by either considering good or excellent
documents as relevant (left 3 bars with relevance threshold 0.5), or
by considering only excellent documents as relevant (right 3 bars
with relevance threshold 1.0)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
P@10 P@5 Reciprocal P@10 P@5 Reciprocal
0.5 1
BM25 Anchor, Title, Body
BM25 Anchor, Title, Body, ExtractedTitle
Name All
RelevanceThreshold Data
Description
Figure 10. Search ranking results.
Figure 10 shows different document retrieval results with different
ranking functions in terms of precision @10, precision @5 and
reciprocal rank:
• Blue bar - BM25 including the fields body, title (file
property), and anchor text.
• Purple bar - BM25 including the fields body, title (file
property), anchor text, and extracted title.
With the additional field of extracted title included in BM25 the
precision @10 increased from 0.132 to 0.145, or by ~10%. Thus,
it is safe to say that the use of extracted title can indeed improve
the precision of document retrieval.
7. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have investigated the problem of automatically
extracting titles from general documents. We have tried using a
machine learning approach to address the problem.
Previous work showed that the machine learning approach can
work well for metadata extraction from research papers. In this
paper, we showed that the approach can work for extraction from
general documents as well. Our experimental results indicated that
the machine learning approach can work significantly better than
the baselines in title extraction from Office documents. Previous
work on metadata extraction mainly used linguistic features in
documents, while we mainly used formatting information. It
appeared that using formatting information is a key for
successfully conducting title extraction from general documents.
We tried different machine learning models including Perceptron,
Maximum Entropy, Maximum Entropy Markov Model, and Voted
Perceptron. We found that the performance of the Perceptorn
models was the best. We applied models constructed in one
domain to another domain and applied models trained in one
language to another language. We found that the accuracies did
not drop substantially across different domains and across
different languages, indicating that the models were generic. We
also attempted to use the extracted titles in document retrieval. We
observed a significant improvement in document ranking
performance for search when using extracted title information. All
the above investigations were not conducted in previous work, and
through our investigations we verified the generality and the
significance of the title extraction approach.
8. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Chunyu Wei and Bojuan Zhao for their work on data
annotation. We acknowledge Jinzhu Li for his assistance in
conducting the experiments. We thank Ming Zhou, John Chen,
Jun Xu, and the anonymous reviewers of JCDL"05 for their
valuable comments on this paper.
9. REFERENCES
[1] Berger, A. L., Della Pietra, S. A., and Della Pietra, V. J. A
maximum entropy approach to natural language processing.
Computational Linguistics, 22:39-71, 1996.
[2] Collins, M. Discriminative training methods for hidden
markov models: theory and experiments with perceptron
algorithms. In Proceedings of Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, 1-8, 2002.
[3] Cortes, C. and Vapnik, V. Support-vector networks. Machine
Learning, 20:273-297, 1995.
[4] Chieu, H. L. and Ng, H. T. A maximum entropy approach to
information extraction from semi-structured and free text. In
Proceedings of the Eighteenth National Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, 768-791, 2002.
[5] Evans, D. K., Klavans, J. L., and McKeown, K. R. Columbia
newsblaster: multilingual news summarization on the Web.
In Proceedings of Human Language Technology conference /
North American chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics annual meeting, 1-4, 2004.
[6] Ghahramani, Z. and Jordan, M. I. Factorial hidden markov
models. Machine Learning, 29:245-273, 1997.
[7] Gheel, J. and Anderson, T. Data and metadata for finding and
reminding, In Proceedings of the 1999 International
Conference on Information Visualization, 446-451,1999.
[8] Giles, C. L., Petinot, Y., Teregowda P. B., Han, H.,
Lawrence, S., Rangaswamy, A., and Pal, N. eBizSearch: a
niche search engine for e-Business. In Proceedings of the
26th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on
Research and Development in Information Retrieval, 
413414, 2003.
[9] Giuffrida, G., Shek, E. C., and Yang, J. Knowledge-based
metadata extraction from PostScript files. In Proceedings of
the Fifth ACM Conference on Digital Libraries, 77-84, 2000.
[10] Han, H., Giles, C. L., Manavoglu, E., Zha, H., Zhang, Z., and
Fox, E. A. Automatic document metadata extraction using
support vector machines. In Proceedings of the Third
ACM/IEEE-CS Joint Conference on Digital Libraries, 37-48,
2003.
[11] Kobayashi, M., and Takeda, K. Information retrieval on the
Web. ACM Computing Surveys, 32:144-173, 2000.
[12] Lafferty, J., McCallum, A., and Pereira, F. Conditional
random fields: probabilistic models for segmenting and
153
labeling sequence data. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth
International Conference on Machine Learning, 282-289,
2001.
[13] Li, Y., Zaragoza, H., Herbrich, R., Shawe-Taylor J., and
Kandola, J. S. The perceptron algorithm with uneven margins.
In Proceedings of the Nineteenth International Conference
on Machine Learning, 379-386, 2002.
[14] Liddy, E. D., Sutton, S., Allen, E., Harwell, S., Corieri, S.,
Yilmazel, O., Ozgencil, N. E., Diekema, A., McCracken, N.,
and Silverstein, J. Automatic Metadata generation &
evaluation. In Proceedings of the 25th Annual International
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval, 401-402, 2002.
[15] Littlefield, A. Effective enterprise information retrieval
across new content formats. In Proceedings of the Seventh
Search Engine Conference,
http://www.infonortics.com/searchengines/sh02/02prog.html,
2002.
[16] Mao, S., Kim, J. W., and Thoma, G. R. A dynamic feature
generation system for automated metadata extraction in
preservation of digital materials. In Proceedings of the First
International Workshop on Document Image Analysis for
Libraries, 225-232, 2004.
[17] McCallum, A., Freitag, D., and Pereira, F. Maximum entropy
markov models for information extraction and segmentation.
In Proceedings of the Seventeenth International Conference
on Machine Learning, 591-598, 2000.
[18] Murphy, L. D. Digital document metadata in organizations:
roles, analytical approaches, and future research directions.
In Proceedings of the Thirty-First Annual Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences, 267-276, 1998.
[19] Pinto, D., McCallum, A., Wei, X., and Croft, W. B. Table
extraction using conditional random fields. In Proceedings of
the 26th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on
Research and Development in Information Retrieval, 
235242, 2003.
[20] Ratnaparkhi, A. Unsupervised statistical models for
prepositional phrase attachment. In Proceedings of the
Seventeenth International Conference on Computational
Linguistics. 1079-1085, 1998.
[21] Robertson, S., Zaragoza, H., and Taylor, M. Simple BM25
extension to multiple weighted fields, In Proceedings of
ACM Thirteenth Conference on Information and Knowledge
Management, 42-49, 2004.
[22] Yi, J. and Sundaresan, N. Metadata based Web mining for
relevance, In Proceedings of the 2000 International
Symposium on Database Engineering & Applications, 
113121, 2000.
[23] Yilmazel, O., Finneran, C. M., and Liddy, E. D. MetaExtract:
An NLP system to automatically assign metadata. In
Proceedings of the 2004 Joint ACM/IEEE Conference on
Digital Libraries, 241-242, 2004.
[24] Zhang, J. and Dimitroff, A. Internet search engines' response
to metadata Dublin Core implementation. Journal of
Information Science, 30:310-320, 2004.
[25] Zhang, L., Pan, Y., and Zhang, T. Recognising and using
named entities: focused named entity recognition using
machine learning. In Proceedings of the 27th Annual
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval, 281-288, 2004.
[26] http://dublincore.org/groups/corporate/Seattle/
154
