A Multilateral Multi-issue Negotiation Protocol
Miniar Hemaissia
THALES Research &
Technology France
RD 128
F-91767 Palaiseau Cedex,
France
miniar.hemaissia@lip6.fr
Amal El Fallah
Seghrouchni
LIP6, University of Paris 6
8 rue du Capitaine Scott
F-75015 Paris, France
amal.elfallah@lip6.fr
Christophe Labreuche
and Juliette Mattioli
THALES Research &
Technology France
RD 128
F-91767 Palaiseau Cedex,
France
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we present a new protocol to address 
multilateral multi-issue negotiation in a cooperative context. We
consider complex dependencies between multiple issues by
modelling the preferences of the agents with a multi-criteria
decision aid tool, also enabling us to extract relevant 
information on a proposal assessment. This information is
used in the protocol to help in accelerating the search for
a consensus between the cooperative agents. In addition,
the negotiation procedure is defined in a crisis management
context where the common objective of our agents is also
considered in the preferences of a mediator agent.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
I.2.11 [Distributed Artificial Intelligence]: Intelligent
agents, Multiagent systems
General Terms
Theory, Design, Experimentation
1. INTRODUCTION
Multi-issue negotiation protocols represent an important
field of study since negotiation problems in the real world
are often complex ones involving multiple issues. To date,
most of previous work in this area ([2, 3, 19, 13]) dealt 
almost exclusively with simple negotiations involving 
independent issues. However, real-world negotiation problems 
involve complex dependencies between multiple issues. When
one wants to buy a car, for example, the value of a given
car is highly dependent on its price, consumption, comfort
and so on. The addition of such interdependencies greatly
complicates the agents utility functions and classical 
utility functions, such as the weighted sum, are not sufficient
to model this kind of preferences. In [10, 9, 17, 14, 20], the
authors consider inter-dependencies between issues, most 
often defined with boolean values, except for [9], while we can
deal with continuous and discrete dependent issues thanks
to the modelling power of the Choquet integral. In [17],
the authors deal with bilateral negotiation while we are 
interested in a multilateral negotiation setting. Klein et al.
[10] present an approach similar to ours, using a mediator
too and information about the strength of the approval or
rejection that an agent makes during the negotiation. In
our protocol, we use more precise information to improve
the proposals thanks to the multi-criteria methodology and
tools used to model the preferences of our agents. Lin, in [14,
20], also presents a mediation service but using an 
evolutionary algorithm to reach optimal solutions and as explained
in [4], players in the evolutionary models need to repeatedly
interact with each other until the stable state is reached.
As the population size increases, the time it takes for the
population to stabilize also increases, resulting in excessive
computation, communication, and time overheads that can
become prohibitive, and for one-to-many and many-to-many
negotiations, the overheads become higher as the number of
players increases. In [9], the authors consider a non-linear
utility function by using constraints on the domain of the
issues and a mediation service to find a combination of bids
maximizing the social welfare. Our preference model, a 
nonlinear utility function too, is more complex than [9] one since
the Choquet integral takes into account the interactions and
the importance of each decision criteria/issue, not only the
dependencies between the values of the issues, to determine
the utility. We also use an iterative protocol enabling us to
find a solution even when no bid combination is possible.
In this paper, we propose a negotiation protocol suited for
multiple agents with complex preferences and taking into 
account, at the same time, multiple interdependent issues and
recommendations made by the agents to improve a proposal.
Moreover, the preferences of our agents are modelled using
a multi-criteria methodology and tools enabling us to take
into account information about the improvements that can
be made to a proposal, in order to help in accelerating the
search for a consensus between the agents. Therefore, we
propose a negotiation protocol consisting of solving our 
decision problem using a MAS with a multi-criteria decision
aiding modelling at the agent level and a cooperation-based
multilateral multi-issue negotiation protocol. This protocol
is studied under a non-cooperative approach and it is shown
943
978-81-904262-7-5 (RPS) c 2007 IFAAMAS
that it has subgame perfect equilibria, provided that agents
behave rationally in the sense of von Neumann and 
Morgenstern. The approach proposed in this paper has been first
introduced and presented in [8]. In this paper, we present
our first experiments, with some noteworthy results, and a
more complex multi-agent system with representatives to
enable us to have a more robust system.
In Section 2, we present our application, a crisis 
management problem. Section 3 deals with the general aspect of the
proposed approach. The preference modelling is described
in sect. 4, whereas the motivations of our protocol are 
considered in sect. 5 and the agent/multiagent modelling in
sect. 6. Section 7 presents the formal modelling and 
properties of our protocol before presenting our first experiments
in sect. 8. Finally, in Section 9, we conclude and present
the future work.
2. CASE STUDY
This protocol is applied to a crisis management problem.
Crisis management is a relatively new field of management
and is composed of three types of activities: crisis 
prevention, operational preparedness and management of declared
crisis. The crisis prevention aims to bring the risk of crisis
to an acceptable level and, when possible, avoid that the 
crisis actually happens. The operational preparedness includes
strategic advanced planning, training and simulation to 
ensure availability, rapid mobilisation and deployment of 
resources to deal with possible emergencies. The management
of declared crisis is the response to - including the 
evacuation, search and rescue - and the recovery from the crisis by
minimising the effects of the crises, limiting the impact on
the community and environment and, on a longer term, by
bringing the community"s systems back to normal. In this
paper, we focus on the response part of the management of
declared crisis activity, and particularly on the evacuation
of the injured people in disaster situations. When a crisis
is declared, the plans defined during the operational 
preparedness activity are executed. For disasters, master plans
are executed. These plans are elaborated by the authorities
with the collaboration of civil protection agencies, police,
health services, non-governmental organizations, etc.
When a victim is found, several actions follow. First, a
rescue party is assigned to the victim who is examined and is
given first aid on the spot. Then, the victims can be placed
in an emergency centre on the ground called the medical
advanced post. For all victims, a sorter physician - 
generally a hospital physician - examines the seriousness of their
injuries and classifies the victims by pathology. The 
evacuation by emergency health transport if necessary can take
place after these clinical examinations and classifications.
Nowadays, to evacuate the injured people, the physicians
contact the emergency call centre to pass on the medical
assessments of the most urgent cases. The emergency call
centre then searches for available and appropriate spaces in
the hospitals to care for these victims. The physicians are
informed of the allocations, so they can proceed to the 
evacuations choosing the emergency health transports according
to the pathologies and the transport modes provided. In
this context, we can observe that the evacuation is based
on three important elements: the examination and 
classification of the victims, the search for an allocation and the
transport. In the case of the 11 March 2004 Madrid attacks,
for instance, some injured people did not receive the 
appropriate health care because, during the search for space, the
emergency call centre did not consider the transport 
constraints and, in particular, the traffic. Therefore, for a large
scale crisis management problem, there is a need to support
the emergency call centre and the physicians in the 
dispatching to take into account the hospitals and the transport 
constraints and availabilities.
3. PROPOSED APPROACH
To accept a proposal, an agent has to consider several 
issues such as, in the case of the crisis management problem,
the availabilities in terms of number of beds by unit, 
medical and surgical staffs, theatres and so on. Therefore, each
agent has its own preferences in correlation with its resource
constraints and other decision criteria such as, for the case
study, the level of congestion of a hospital. All the agents
also make decisions by taking into account the dependencies
between these decision criteria.
The first hypothesis of our approach is that there are 
several parties involved in and impacted by the decision, and
so they have to decide together according to their own 
constraints and decision criteria. Negotiation is the process by
which a group facing a conflict communicates with one 
another to try and come to a mutually acceptable agreement
or decision and so, the agents have to negotiate. The 
conflict we have to resolve is finding an acceptable solution for
all the parties by using a particular protocol. In our 
context, multilateral negotiation is a negotiation protocol type
that is the best suited for this type of problem : this type
of protocol enables the hospitals and the physicians to 
negotiate together. The negotiation also deals with multiple
issues. Moreover, an other hypothesis is that we are in a
cooperative context where all the parties have a common
objective which is to provide the best possible solution for
everyone. This implies the use of a negotiation protocol 
encouraging the parties involved to cooperate as satisfying its
preferences.
Taking into account these aspects, a Multi-Agent System
(MAS) seems to be a reliable method in the case of a 
distributed decision making process. Indeed, a MAS is a suitable
answer when the solution has to combine, at least, 
distribution features and reasoning capabilities. Another motivation
for using MAS lies in the fact that MAS is well known for
facilitating automated negotiation at the operative decision
making level in various applications.
Therefore, our approach consists of solving a multiparty
decision problem using a MAS with
• The preferences of the agents are modelled using a
multi-criteria decision aid tool, MYRIAD, also 
enabling us to consider multi-issue problems by evaluating
proposals on several criteria.
• A cooperation-based multilateral and multi-issue 
negotiation protocol.
4. THE PREFERENCE MODEL
We consider a problem where an agent has several decision
criteria, a set Nk = {1, . . . , nk} of criteria for each agent k
involved in the negotiation protocol. These decision criteria
enable the agents to evaluate the set of issues that are 
negotiated. The issues correspond directly or not to the decision
criteria. However, for the example of the crisis management
944 The Sixth Intl. Joint Conf. on Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (AAMAS 07)
problem, the issues are the set of victims to dispatch 
between the hospitals. These issues are translated to decision
criteria enabling the hospital to evaluate its congestion and
so to an updated number of available beds, medical teams
and so on. In order to take into account the complexity that
exists between the criteria/issues, we use a multi-criteria 
decision aiding (MCDA) tool named MYRIAD [12] developed
at Thales for MCDA applications based on a two-additive
Choquet integral which is a good compromise between 
versatility and ease to understand and model the interactions
between decision criteria [6].
The set of the attributes of Nk is denoted by Xk
1 , . . . , Xk
nk
.
All the attributes are made commensurate thanks to the 
introduction of partial utility functions uk
i : Xk
i → [0, 1]. The
[0, 1] scale depicts the satisfaction of the agent k regarding
the values of the attributes. An option x is identified to an
element of Xk
= Xk
1 × · · · × Xk
nk
, with x = (x1, . . . , xnk ).
Then the overall assessment of x is given by
Uk(x) = Hk(uk
1 (x1), . . . , uh
nk
(xnk )) (1)
where Hk : [0, 1]nk → [0, 1] is the aggregation function. The
overall preference relation over Xk
is then
x y ⇐⇒ Uk(x) ≥ Uk(y) .
The two-additive Choquet integral is defined for
(z1, . . . , znk ) ∈ [0, 1]nk by [7]
Hk(z1, . . . , znk ) =
X
i∈Nk
0
@vk
i −
1
2
X
j=i
|Ik
i,j|
1
A zi
+
X
Ik
i,j >0
Ik
i,j zi ∧ zj +
X
Ii,j <0
|Ii,j| zi ∨ zj (2)
where vk
i is the relative importance of criterion i for agent
k and Ik
i,j is the interaction between criteria i and j, ∧ and
∨ denote the min and max functions respectively. Assume
that zi < zj. A positive interaction between criteria i and
j depicts complementarity between these criteria (positive
synergy) [7]. Hence, the lower score of z on criterion i 
conceals the positive effect of the better score on criterion j to
a larger extent on the overall evaluation than the impact of
the relative importance of the criteria taken independently
of the other ones. In other words, the score of z on criterion
j is penalized by the lower score on criterion i. Conversely, a
negative interaction between criteria i and j depicts 
substitutability between these criteria (negative synergy) [7]. The
score of z on criterion i is then saved by a better score on
criterion j.
In MYRIAD, we can also obtain some recommendations
corresponding to an indicator ωC (H, x) measuring the worth
to improve option x w.r.t. Hk on some criteria C ⊆ Nk as
follows
ωC (Hk, x)=
Z 1
0
Hk
`
(1 − τ)xC + τ, xNk\C
´
− Hk(x)
EC (τ, x)
dτ
where ((1−τ)xC +τ, xNk\C ) is the compound act that equals
(1 − τ)xi + τ if i ∈ C and equals xi if i ∈ Nk \ C. Moreover,
EC (τ, x) is the effort to go from the profile x to the profile
((1 − τ)xC + τ, xNk\C ). Function ωC (Hk, x) depicts the 
average improvement of Hk when the criteria of coalition A
range from xC to 1C divided by the average effort needed
for this improvement. We generally assume that EC is of
order 1, that is EC (τ, x) = τ
P
i∈C (1 − xi). The expression
of ωC (Hk, x) when Hk is a Choquet integral, is given in [11].
The agent is then recommended to improve of coalition C
for which ωC (Hk, x) is maximum. This recommendation is
very useful in a negotiation protocol since it helps the agents
to know what to do if they want an offer to be accepted while
not revealing their own preference model.
5. PROTOCOL MOTIVATIONS
For multi-issue problems, there are two approaches: a
complete package approach where the issues are 
negotiated simultaneously in opposition to the sequential approach
where the issues are negotiated one by one. When the issues
are dependant, then it is the best choice to bargain 
simultaneously over all issues [5]. Thus, the complete package is
the adopted approach so that an offer will be on the 
overall set of injured people while taking into account the other
decision criteria.
We have to consider that all the parties of the 
negotiation process have to agree on the decision since they are all
involved in and impacted by this decision and so an 
unanimous agreement is required in the protocol. In addition, no
party can leave the process until an agreement is reached,
i.e. a consensus achieved. This makes sense since a proposal
concerns all the parties. Moreover, we have to guarantee the
availability of the resources needed by the parties to ensure
that a proposal is realistic. To this end, the information
about these availabilities are used to determine admissible
proposals such that an offer cannot be made if one of the 
parties has not enough resources to execute/achieve it. At the
beginning of the negotiation, each party provides its 
maximum availabilities, this defining the constraints that have
to be satisfied for each offer submitted.
The negotiation has also to converge quickly on an 
unanimous agreement. We decided to introduce in the negotiation
protocol an incentive to cooperate taking into account the
passed negotiation time. This incentive is defined on the
basis of a time dependent penalty, the discounting factor as
in [18] or a time-dependent threshold. This penalty has to
be used in the accept/reject stage of our consensus 
procedure. In fact, in the case of a discounting factor, each party
will accept or reject an offer by evaluating the proposal 
using its utility function deducted from the discounting factor.
In the case of a time-dependent threshold, if the evaluation
is greater or equal to this threshold, the offer is accepted,
otherwise, in the next period, its threshold is reduced.
The use of a penalty is not enough alone since it does
not help in finding a solution. Some information about the
assessments of the parties involved in the negotiation are
needed. In particular, it would be helpful to know why an
offer has been rejected and/or what can be done to make
a proposal that would be accepted. MYRIAD provides an
analysis that determines the flaws an option, here a 
proposal. In particular, it gives this type of information: which
criteria of a proposal should be improved so as to reach the
highest possible overall evaluation [11]. As we use this tool
to model the parties involved in the negotiation, the 
information about the criteria to improve can be used by the
mediator to elaborate the proposals. We also consider that
the dual function can be used to take into account another
type of information: on which criteria of a proposal, no 
improvement is necessary so that the overall evaluation of a
proposal is still acceptable, do not decrease. Thus, all 
information is a constraint to be satisfied as much as possible by
The Sixth Intl. Joint Conf. on Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (AAMAS 07) 945
Figure 1: An illustration of some system.
the parties to make a new proposal.
We are in a cooperative context and revealing one"s 
opinion on what can be improved is not prohibited, on the 
contrary, it is useful and recommended here seeing that it helps
in converging on an agreement. Therefore, when one of the
parties refuses an offer, some information will be 
communicated. In order to facilitate and speed up the negotiation,
we introduce a mediator. This specific entity is in charge
of making the proposals to the other parties in the system
by taking into account their public constraints (e.g. their
availabilities) and the recommendations they make. This
mediator can also be considered as the representative of
the general interest we can have, in some applications, such
as in the crisis management problem, the physician will be
the mediator and will also have some more information to
consider when making an offer (e.g. traffic state, transport
mode and time). Each party in a negotiation N, a 
negotiator, can also be a mediator of another negotiation N , this
party becoming the representative of N in the negotiation
N, as illustrated by fig. 1 what can also help in reducing
the communication time.
6. AGENTIFICATION
How the problem is transposed in a MAS problem is a
very important aspect when designing such a system. The
agentification has an influence upon the systems efficiency in
solving the problem. Therefore, in this section, we describe
the elements and constraints taken into account during the
modelling phase and for the model itself. However, for this
negotiation application, the modelling is quite natural when
one observes the negotiation protocol motivations and main
properties.
First of all, it seems obvious that there should be one agent
for each player of our multilateral multi-issue negotiation
protocol. The agents have the involved parties" information
and preferences. These agents are:
• Autonomous: they decide for themselves what, when
and under what conditions actions should be 
performed;
• Rational: they have a means-ends competence to fit
its decisions, according to its knowledge, preferences
and goal;
• Self-interested: they have their own interests which
may conflict with the interests of other agents.
Moreover, their preferences are modelled and a proposal
evaluated and analysed using MYRIAD. Each agent has
private information and can access public information as
knowledge.
In fact, there are two types of agents: the mediator type
for the agents corresponding to the mediator of our 
negotiation protocol, the delegated physician in our application,
and the negotiator type for the agents corresponding to
the other parties, the hospitals. The main behaviours that
an agent of type mediator needs to negotiate in our protocol
are the following:
• convert_improvements: converts the information 
given by the other agents involved in the negotiation
about the improvements to be done, into constraints
on the next proposal to be made;
• convert_no_decrease: converts the information given
by the other agents involved in the negotiation about
the points that should not be changed into constraints
on the next proposal to be made;
• construct_proposal: constructs a new proposal 
according to the constraints obtained with 
convert_improvements, convert_no_decrease and the agent 
preferences;
The main behaviours that an agent of type negotiator
needs to negotiate in our protocol are the following:
• convert_proposal: converts a proposal to a MYRIAD
option of the agent according to its preferences model
and its private data;
• convert_improvements_wc: converts the agent 
recommendations for the improvements of a MYRIAD 
option into general information on the proposal;
• convert_no_decrease_wc: converts the agent 
recommendations about the criteria that should not be 
changed in the MYRIAD option into general information
on the proposal;
In addition to these behaviours, there are, for the two types
of agents, access behaviours to MYRIAD functionalities
such as the evaluation and improvement functions:
• evaluate_option: evaluates the MYRIAD option 
obtained using the agent behaviour convert_proposal;
• improvements: gets the agent recommendations to 
improve a proposal from the MYRIAD option;
• no_decrease: gets the agent recommendations to not
change some criteria from the MYRIAD option;
Of course, before running the system with such agents, we
must have defined each party preferences model in 
MYRIAD. This model has to be part of the agent so that it could
be used to make the assessments and to retrieve the 
improvements. In addition to these behaviours, the communication
acts between the agents is as follows.
1. mediator agent communication acts:
946 The Sixth Intl. Joint Conf. on Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (AAMAS 07)
m1 m
1
1
m
inform1 m
mediator negotiator
accept−proposal
l
1
accept−proposal
m−l
reject−proposal
propose
propose
Figure 2: The protocol diagram in AUML, and
where m is the number of negotiator agents and l
is the number of agents refusing current proposal.
(a) propose: sends a message containing a proposal
to all negotiator agents;
(b) inform: sends a message to all negotiator agents
to inform them that an agreement has been 
reached and containing the consensus outcome.
2. negotiator agent communication acts:
(a) accept-proposal: sends a message to the 
mediator agent containing the agent recommendations
to improve the proposal and obtained with
convert_improvements_wc;
(b) reject-proposal: sends a message to the 
mediator agent containing the agent recommendations
about the criteria that should not be changed and
obtained with convert_no_decrease_wc.
Such agents are interchangeable, in a case of failure, since
they all have the same properties and represent a user with
his preference model, not depending on the agent, but on the
model defined in MYRIAD. When the issues and the 
decision criteria are different from each other, the information
about the criteria improvement have to be pre-processed to
give some instructions on the directions to take and about
the negotiated issues. It is the same for the evaluation of a
proposal: each agent has to convert the information about
the issues to update its private information and to obtain
the values of each attribute of the decision criteria.
7. OUR PROTOCOL
Formally, we consider negotiations where a set of 
players A = {1, 2, . . . , m} and a player a are negotiating over
a set Q of size q. The player a is the protocol 
mediator, the mediator agent of the agentification. The 
utility/preference function of a player k ∈ A ∪ {a} is Uk, 
defined using MYRIAD, as presented in Section 4, with a set
Nk of criteria, Xk
an option, and so on. An offer is a 
vector P = (P1, P2, · · · , Pm), a partition of Q, in which Pk is
player k"s share of Q. We have P ∈ P where P is the set of
admissible proposals, a finite set. Note that P is determined
using all players general constraints on the proposals and Q.
Moreover, let ˜P denote a particular proposal defined as a"s
preferred proposal.
We also have the following notation: δk is the 
threshold decrease factor of player k, Φk : Pk → Xk
is player
k"s function to convert a proposal to an option and Ψk is
the function indicating which points P has to be improved,
with Ψk its dual function - on which points no 
improvement is necessary. Ψk is obtained using the dual function of
ωC (Hk, x):
eωC (Hk, x)=
Z 1
0
Hk(x) − Hk
`
τ xC , xNk\C
´
eEC (τ, x)
dτ
Where eEC (τ, x) is the cost/effort to go from (τxC , xNk\C )
to x.
In period t of our consensus procedure, player a proposes
an agreement P. All players k ∈ A respond to a by 
accepting or rejecting P. The responses are made simultaneously.
If all players k ∈ A accept the offer, the game ends. If any
player k rejects P, then the next period t+1 begins: player a
makes another proposal P by taking into account 
information provided by the players and the ones that have rejected
P apply a penalty. Therefore, our negotiation protocol can
be as follows:
Protocol P1.
• At the beginning, we set period t = 0
• a makes a proposal P ∈ P that has not been
proposed before.
• Wait that all players of A give their opinion
Yes or No to the player a. If all players
agree on P, this later is chosen. Otherwise
t is incremented and we go back to previous
point.
• If there is no more offer left from P, the
default offer ˜P will be chosen.
• The utility of players regarding a given 
offer decreases over time. More precisely, the
utility of player k ∈ A at period t regarding
offer P is Uk(Φk(Pk), t) = ft(Uk(Φk(Pk))),
where one can take for instance ft(x) =
x.(δk)t
or ft(x) = x − δk.t, as penalty 
function.
Lemma 1. Protocol P1 has at least one subgame perfect
equilibrium 1
.
Proof : Protocol P1 is first transformed in a game in 
extensive form. To this end, one shall specify the order in which
the responders A react to the offer P of a. However the
order in which the players answer has no influence on the
course of the game and in particular on their personal 
utility. Hence protocol P1 is strictly equivalent to a game in
1
A subgame perfect equilibrium is an equilibrium such that
players" strategies constitute a Nash equilibrium in every
subgame of the original game [18, 16]. A Nash equilibrium
is a set of strategies, one for each player, such that no player
has incentive to unilaterally change his/her action [15].
The Sixth Intl. Joint Conf. on Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (AAMAS 07) 947
extensive form, considering any order of the players A. This
game is clearly finite since P is finite and each offer can
only be proposed once. Finally P1 corresponds to a game
with perfect information. We end the proof by using a 
classical result stating that any finite game in extensive form
with perfect information has at least one subgame perfect
equilibrium (see e.g. [16]).
Rational players (in the sense of von Neumann and 
Morgenstern) involved in protocol P1 will necessarily come up
with a subgame perfect equilibrium.
Example 1. Consider an example with A = {1, 2} and
P = {P1
, P2
, P3
} where the default offer is P1
. Assume
that ft(x) = x − 0.1 t. Consider the following table giving
the utilities at t = 0.
P1
P2
P3
a 1 0.8 0.7
1 0.1 0.7 0.5
2 0.1 0.3 0.8
It is easy to see that there is one single subgame perfect 
equilibrium for protocol P1 corresponding to these values. This
equilibrium consists of the following choices: first a proposes
P3
; player 1 rejects this offer; a proposes then P2
and both
players 1 and 2 accepts otherwise they are threatened to 
receive the worse offer P1
for them. Finally offer P2
is 
chosen. Option P1
is the best one for a but the two other players
vetoed it. It is interesting to point out that, even though a
prefers P2
to P3
, offer P3
is first proposed and this make
P2
being accepted. If a proposes P2
first, then the subgame
perfect equilibrium in this situation is P3
. To sum up, the
worse preferred options have to be proposed first in order to
get finally the best one. But this entails a waste of time.
Analysing the previous example, one sees that the game
outcome at the equilibrium is P2
that is not very attractive
for player 2. Option P3
seems more balanced since no player
judges it badly. It could be seen as a better solution as a
consensus among the agents.
In order to introduce this notion of balanceness in the
protocol, we introduce a condition under which a player will
be obliged to accept the proposal, reducing the autonomy
of the agents but for increasing rationality and cooperation.
More precisely if the utility of a player is larger than a given
threshold then acceptance is required. The threshold 
decreases over time so that players have to make more and
more concession. Therefore, the protocol becomes as 
follows.
Protocol P2.
• At the beginning we set period t = 0
• a makes a proposal P ∈ P that has not been
proposed before.
• Wait that all players of A give their opinion
Yes or No to the player a. A player k must
accept the offer if Uk(Φk(Pk)) ≥ ρk(t) where
ρk(t) tends to zero when t grows. 
Moreover there exists T such that for all t ≥ T,
ρk(t) = 0. If all players agree on P, this
later is chosen. Otherwise t is incremented
and we go back to previous point.
• If there is no more offer left from P, the
default offer ˜P will be chosen.
One can show exactly as in Lemma 1 that protocol P2
has at least one subgame perfect equilibrium. We expect
that protocol P2 provides a solution not to far from P ,
so it favours fairness among the players. Therefore, our
cooperation-based multilateral multi-issue protocol is the
following:
Protocol P.
• At the beginning we set period t = 0
• a makes a proposal P ∈ P that has not
been proposed before, considering Ψk(Pt
)
and Ψk(Pt
) for all players k ∈ A.
• Wait that all players of A give their opinion
(Yes , Ψk(Pt
)) or (No , Ψk(Pt
)) to the
player a. A player k must accept the offer
if Uk(Φk(Pk)) ≥ ρk(t) where ρk(t) tends to
zero when t grows. Moreover there exists
T such that for all t ≥ T, ρk(t) = 0. If
all players agree on P, this later is chosen.
Otherwise t is incremented and we go back
to previous point.
• If there is no more offer left from P, the
default offer ˜P will be chosen.
8. EXPERIMENTS
We developed a MAS using the widely used JADE agent
platform [1]. This MAS is designed to be as general as 
possible (e.g. a general framework to specialise according to the
application) and enable us to make some preliminary 
experiments. The experiments aim at verifying that our approach
gives solutions as close as possible to the Maximin solution
and in a small number of rounds and hopefully in a short
time since our context is highly cooperative. We defined
the two types of agents and their behaviours as introduced
in section 6. The agents and their behaviours correspond
to the main classes of our prototype, NegotiatorAgent
and NegotiatorBehaviour for the negotiator agents, and
MediatorAgent and MediatorBehaviour for the mediator
agent. These classes extend JADE classes and integrate
MYRIAD into the agents, reducing the amount of 
communications in the system. Some functionalities depending on
the application have to be implemented according to the 
application by extending these classes. In particular, all 
conversion parts of the agents have to be specified according to
the application since to convert a proposal into decision 
criteria, we need to know, first, this model and the correlations
between the proposals and this model.
First, to illustrate our protocol, we present a simple 
example of our dispatch problem. In this example, we have
three hospitals, H1, H2 and H3. Each hospital can receive
victims having a particular pathology in such a way that
H1 can receive patients with the pathology burn, surgery
or orthopedic, H2 can receive patients with the pathology
surgery, orthopedic or cardiology and H3 can receive 
patients with the pathology burn or cardiology. All the 
hospitals have similar decision criteria reflecting their preferences
on the level of congestion they can face for the overall 
hospital and the different services available, as briefly explained
for hospital H1 hereafter.
For hospital H1, the preference model, fig. 3, is composed
of five criteria. These criteria correspond to the preferences
on the pathologies the hospital can treat. In the case of
948 The Sixth Intl. Joint Conf. on Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (AAMAS 07)
Figure 3: The H1 preference model in MYRIAD.
the pathology burn, the corresponding criterion, also named
burn as shown in fig. 3, represents the preferences of H1 
according to the value of Cburn which is the current capacity
of burn. Therefore, the utility function of this criterion 
represents a preference such that the more there are patients of
this pathology in the hospital, the less the hospital may 
satisfy them, and this with an initial capacity. In addition to
reflecting this kind of viewpoint, the aggregation function as
defined in MYRIAD introduces a veto on the criteria burn,
surgery, orthopedic and EReceipt, where EReceipt is the
criterion for the preferences about the capacity to receive a
number of patients at the same time.
In this simplified example, the physician have no 
particular preferences on the dispatch and the mediator agent
chooses a proposal randomly in a subset of the set of 
admissibility. This subset have to satisfy as much as possible the
recommendations made by the hospitals. To solve this 
problem, for this example, we decided to solve a linear problem
with the availability constraints and the recommendations
as linear constraints on the dispatch values. The set of 
admissibility is then obtained by solving this linear problem
by the use of Prolog. Moreover, only the recommendations
on how to improve a proposal are taken into account. The
problem to solve is then to dispatch to hospital H1, H2 and
H3, the set of victims composed of 5 victims with the 
pathology burn, 10 with surgery, 3 with orthopedic and 7 with
cardiology. The availabilities of the hospitals are as 
presented in the following table.
Available Overall burn surg. orthop. cardio.
H1 11 4 8 
10H2 25 - 3 4 10
H3 7 10 - - 3
We obtain a multiagent system with the mediator agent
and three agents of type negotiator for the three hospital
in the problem. The hospitals threshold are fixed 
approximatively to the level where an evaluation is considered as
good. To start, the negotiator agents send their 
availabilities. The mediator agent makes a proposal chosen randomly
in admissible set obtained with these availabilities as 
linear constraints. This proposal is the vector P0 = [[H1,burn,
3], [H1, surgery, 8], [H1, orthopaedic, 0], [H2, surgery, 2],
[H2, orthopaedic, 3], [H2, cardiology, 6], [H3, burn, 2], [H3,
cardiology, 1]] and the mediator sends propose(P0) to H1,
H2 and H3 for approval. Each negotiator agent evaluates
this proposal and answers back by accepting or rejecting P0:
• Agent H1 rejects this offer since its evaluation is very
far from the threshold (0.29, a bad score) and gives
a recommendation to improve burn and surgery by
sending the message 
reject_proposal([burn,surgery]);
• Agent H2 accepts this offer by sending the message
accept_proposal(), the proposal evaluation being 
good;
• Agent H3 accepts P0 by sending the message accept_
proposal(), the proposal evaluation being good.
Just with the recommendations provided by agent H1, the
mediator is able to make a new proposal by restricting the
value of burn and surgery. The new proposal obtained is
then P1 = [[H1,burn, 0], [H1, surgery, 8], [H1, orthopaedic,
1], [H2, surgery, 2], [H2, orthopaedic, 2], [H2, cardiology,
6], [H3, burn, 5], [H3, cardiology, 1]]. The mediator sends
propose(P1) the negotiator agents. H1, H2 and H3 answer
back by sending the message accept_proposal(), P1 being
evaluated with a high enough score to be acceptable, and
also considered as a good proposal when using the 
explanation function of MYRIAD. An agreement is reached with
P1. Note that the evaluation of P1 by H3 has decreased in
comparison with P0, but not enough to be rejected and that
this solution is the Pareto one, P∗
.
Other examples have been tested with the same settings:
issues in IN, three negotiator agents and the same mediator
agent, with no preference model but selecting randomly the
proposal. We obtained solutions either equal or close to the
Maximin solution, the distance from the standard deviation
being less than 0.0829, the evaluations not far from the ones
obtained with P∗
and with less than seven proposals made.
This shows us that we are able to solve this multi-issue 
multilateral negotiation problem in a simple and efficient way,
with solutions close to the Pareto solution.
9. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper presents a new protocol to address 
multilateral multi-issue negotiation in a cooperative context. The
first main contribution is that we take into account complex
inter-dependencies between multiple issues with the use of
a complex preference modelling. This contribution is 
reinforced by the use of multi-issue negotiation in a multilateral
context. Our second contribution is the use of sharp 
recommendations in the protocol to help in accelerating the search
of a consensus between the cooperative agents and in finding
an optimal solution. We have also shown that the protocol
has subgame perfect equilibria and these equilibria converge
to the usual maximum solution. Moreover, we tested this
protocol in a crisis management context where the 
negotiation aim is where to evacuate a whole set of injured people
to predefined hospitals.
We have already developed a first MAS, in particular 
integrating MYRIAD, to test this protocol in order to know
more about its efficiency in terms of solution quality and
quickness in finding a consensus. This prototype enabled
us to solve some examples with our approach and the 
results we obtained are encouraging since we obtained quickly
good agreements, close to the Pareto solution, in the light
of the initial constraints of the problem: the availabilities.
We still have to improve our MAS by taking into account
The Sixth Intl. Joint Conf. on Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (AAMAS 07) 949
the two types of recommendations and by adding a 
preference model to the mediator of our system. Moreover, a
comparative study has to be done in order to evaluate the
performance of our framework against the existing ones and
against some variations on the protocol.
10. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work is partly funded by the ICIS research project
under the Dutch BSIK Program (BSIK 03024).
11. REFERENCES
[1] JADE. http://jade.tilab.com/.
[2] P. Faratin, C. Sierra, and N. R. Jennings. Using
similarity criteria to make issue trade-offs in
automated negotiations. Artificial Intelligence,
142(2):205-237, 2003.
[3] S. S. Fatima, M. Wooldridge, and N. R. Jennings.
Optimal negotiation of multiple issues in incomplete
information settings. In 3rd International Joint
Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent
Systems (AAMAS"04), pages 1080-1087, New York,
USA, 2004.
[4] S. S. Fatima, M. Wooldridge, and N. R. Jennings. A
comparative study of game theoretic and evolutionary
models of bargaining for software agents. Artificial
Intelligence Review, 23:185-203, 2005.
[5] S. S. Fatima, M. Wooldridge, and N. R. Jennings. On
efficient procedures for multi-issue negotiation. In 8th
International Workshop on Agent-Mediated Electronic
Commerce(AMEC"06), pages 71-84, Hakodate, Japan,
2006.
[6] M. Grabisch. The application of fuzzy integrals in
multicriteria decision making. European J. of
Operational Research, 89:445-456, 1996.
[7] M. Grabisch, T. Murofushi, and M. Sugeno. Fuzzy
Measures and Integrals. Theory and Applications
(edited volume). Studies in Fuzziness. Physica Verlag,
2000.
[8] M. Hemaissia, A. El Fallah-Seghrouchni,
C. Labreuche, and J. Mattioli. Cooperation-based
multilateral multi-issue negotiation for crisis
management. In 2th International Workshop on
Rational, Robust and Secure Negotiation (RRS"06),
pages 77-95, Hakodate, Japan, May 2006.
[9] T. Ito, M. Klein, and H. Hattori. A negotiation
protocol for agents with nonlinear utility functions. In
AAAI, 2006.
[10] M. Klein, P. Faratin, H. Sayama, and Y. Bar-Yam.
Negotiating complex contracts. Group Decision and
Negotiation, 12:111-125, March 2003.
[11] C. Labreuche. Determination of the criteria to be
improved first in order to improve as much as possible
the overall evaluation. In IPMU 2004, pages 609-616,
Perugia, Italy, 2004.
[12] C. Labreuche and F. Le Hu´ed´e. MYRIAD: a tool suite
for MCDA. In EUSFLAT"05, pages 204-209,
Barcelona, Spain, 2005.
[13] R. Y. K. Lau. Towards genetically optimised
multi-agent multi-issue negotiations. In Proceedings of
the 38th Annual Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences (HICSS"05), Big Island, Hawaii, 2005.
[14] R. J. Lin. Bilateral multi-issue contract negotiation for
task redistribution using a mediation service. In Agent
Mediated Electronic Commerce VI (AMEC"04), New
York, USA, 2004.
[15] J. F. Nash. Non cooperative games. Annals of
Mathematics, 54:286-295, 1951.
[16] G. Owen. Game Theory. Academic Press, New York,
1995.
[17] V. Robu, D. J. A. Somefun, and J. A. L. Poutr´e.
Modeling complex multi-issue negotiations using
utility graphs. In 4th International Joint Conference
on Autonomous agents and multiagent systems
(AAMAS"05), pages 280-287, 2005.
[18] A. Rubinstein. Perfect equilibrium in a bargaining
model. Econometrica, 50:97-109, jan 1982.
[19] L.-K. Soh and X. Li. Adaptive, confidence-based
multiagent negotiation strategy. In 3rd International
Joint Conference on Autonomous agents and
multiagent systems (AAMAS"04), pages 1048-1055,
Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 2004.
[20] H.-W. Tung and R. J. Lin. Automated contract
negotiation using a mediation service. In 7th IEEE
International Conference on E-Commerce Technology
(CEC"05), pages 374-377, Munich, Germany, 2005.
950 The Sixth Intl. Joint Conf. on Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (AAMAS 07)
