On the Benefits of Cheating by Self-Interested Agents in
Vehicular Networks∗
Raz Lin and Sarit Kraus
Computer Science Department
Bar-Ilan University
Ramat-Gan, Israel
{linraz,sarit}@cs.biu.ac.il
Yuval Shavitt
School of Electrical Engineering
Tel-Aviv University, Israel
shavitt@eng.tau.ac.il
ABSTRACT
As more and more cars are equipped with GPS and Wi-Fi
transmitters, it becomes easier to design systems that will
allow cars to interact autonomously with each other, e.g.,
regarding traffic on the roads. Indeed, car manufacturers
are already equipping their cars with such devices. Though,
currently these systems are a proprietary, we envision a 
natural evolution where agent applications will be developed
for vehicular systems, e.g., to improve car routing in dense
urban areas. Nonetheless, this new technology and agent 
applications may lead to the emergence of self-interested car
owners, who will care more about their own welfare than the
social welfare of their peers. These car owners will try to
manipulate their agents such that they transmit false data
to their peers. Using a simulation environment, which 
models a real transportation network in a large city, we 
demonstrate the benefits achieved by self-interested agents if no
counter-measures are implemented.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
I.2.11 [Artificial Intelligence]: Distributed Artificial 
Intelligence-Intelligent agents
General Terms
Experimentation
1. INTRODUCTION
As technology advances, more and more cars are being
equipped with devices, which enable them to act as 
autonomous agents. An important advancement in this 
respect is the introduction of ad-hoc communication networks
(such as Wi-Fi), which enable the exchange of information
between cars, e.g., for locating road congestions [1] and 
optimal routes [15] or improving traffic safety [2].
Vehicle-To-Vehicle (V2V) communication is already 
onboard by some car manufactures, enabling the 
collaboration between different cars on the road. For example, GM"s
proprietary algorithm [6], called the threat assessment 
algorithm, constantly calculates, in real time, other vehicles"
positions and speeds, and enables messaging other cars when
a collision is imminent; Also, Honda has began testing its
system in which vehicles talk with each other and with the
highway system itself [7].
In this paper, we investigate the attraction of being a 
selfish agent in vehicular networks. That is, we investigate the
benefits achieved by car owners, who tamper with on-board
devices and incorporate their own self-interested agents in
them, which act for their benefit. We build on the notion
of Gossip Networks, introduced by Shavitt and Shay [15], in
which the agents can obtain road congestion information by
gossiping with peer agents using ad-hoc communication.
We recognize two typical behaviors that the self-interested
agents could embark upon, in the context of vehicular 
networks. In the first behavior, described in Section 4, the
objective of the self-interested agents is to maximize their
own utility, expressed by their average journey duration on
the road. This situation can be modeled in real life by car
owners, whose aim is to reach their destination as fast as 
possible, and would like to have their way free of other cars. To
this end they will let their agents cheat the other agents, by
injecting false information into the network. This is achieved
by reporting heavy traffic values for the roads on their route
to other agents in the network in the hope of making the
other agents believe that the route is jammed, and causing
them to choose a different route.
The second type of behavior, described in Section 5, is
modeled by the self-interested agents" objective to cause
disorder in the network, more than they are interested in
maximizing their own utility. This kind of behavior could
be generated, for example, by vandalism or terrorists, who
aim to cause as much mayhem in the network as possible.
We note that the introduction of self-interested agents to
the network, would most probably motivate other agents to
try and detect these agents in order to minimize their effect.
This is similar, though in a different context, to the problem
introduced by Lamport et al. [8] as the Byzantine Generals
Problem. However, the introduction of mechanisms to deal
with self-interested agents is costly and time consuming. In
this paper we focus mainly on the attractiveness of selfish
behavior by these agents, while we also provide some insights
327
978-81-904262-7-5 (RPS) c 2007 IFAAMAS
into the possibility of detecting self-interested agents and
minimizing their effect.
To demonstrate the benefits achieved by self-interested
agents, we have used a simulation environment, which 
models the transportation network in a central part of a large
real city. The simulation environment is further described in
Section 3. Our simulations provide insights to the benefits
of self-interested agents cheating. Our findings can motivate
future research in this field in order to minimize the effect
of selfish-agents.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2
we review related work in the field of self-interested agents
and V2V communications. We continue and formally 
describe our environment and simulation settings in Section 3.
Sections 4 and 5 describe the different behaviors of the 
selfinterested agents and our findings. Finally, we conclude the
paper with open questions and future research directions.
2. RELATED WORK
In their seminal paper, Lamport et al. [8] describe the
Byzantine Generals problem, in which processors need to
handle malfunctioning components that give conflicting 
information to different parts of the system. They also present
a model in which not all agents are connected, and thus an
agent cannot send a message to all the other agents. Dolev et
al. [5] has built on this problem and has analyzed the number
of faulty agents that can be tolerated in order to eventually
reach the right conclusion about true data. Similar work
is presented by Minsky et al. [11], who discuss techniques
for constructing gossip protocols that are resilient to up to
t malicious host failures. As opposed to the above works,
our work focuses on vehicular networks, in which the agents
are constantly roaming the network and exchanging data.
Also, the domain of transportation networks introduces 
dynamic data, as the load of the roads is subject to change. In
addition, the system in transportation networks has a 
feedback mechanism, since the load in the roads depends on the
reports and the movement of the agents themselves.
Malkhi et al. [10] present a gossip algorithm for 
propagating information in a network of processors, in the presence
of malicious parties. Their algorithm prevents the spreading
of spurious gossip and diffuses genuine data. This is done
in time, which is logarithmic in the number of processes
and linear in the number of corrupt parties. Nevertheless,
their work assumes that the network is static and also that
the agents are static (they discuss a network of processors).
This is not true for transportation networks. For example,
in our model, agents might gossip about heavy traffic load
of a specific road, which is currently jammed, yet this 
information might be false several minutes later, leaving the
agents to speculate whether the spreading agents are indeed
malicious or not. In addition, as the agents are constantly
moving, each agent cannot choose with whom he interacts
and exchanges data.
In the context of analyzing the data and deciding whether
the data is true or not, researchers have focused on 
distributed reputation systems or decision mechanisms to decide
whether or not to share data.
Yu and Singh [18] build a social network of agents" 
reputations. Every agent keeps a list of its neighbors, which can
be changed over time, and computes the trustworthiness of
other agents by updating the current values of testimonies
obtained from reliable referral chains. After a bad 
experience with another agent every agent decreases the rating of
the "bad" agent and propagates this bad experience 
throughout the network so that other agents can update their 
ratings accordingly. This approach might be implemented in
our domain to allow gossip agents to identify self-interested
agents and thus minimize their effect. However, the 
implementation of such a mechanism is an expensive addition
to the infrastructure of autonomous agents in 
transportation networks. This is mainly due to the dynamic nature of
the list of neighbors in transportation networks. Thus, not
only does it require maintaining the neighbors" list, since the
neighbors change frequently, but it is also harder to build a
good reputation system.
Leckie et al. [9] focus on the issue of when to share 
information between the agents in the network. Their domain
involves monitoring distributed sensors. Each agent 
monitors a subset of the sensors and evaluates a hypothesis based
on the local measurements of its sensors. If the agent 
believes that a hypothesis is sufficient likely he exchanges this
information with the other agents. In their domain, the
goal of all the agents is to reach a global consensus about
the likelihood of the hypothesis. In our domain, however, as
the agents constantly move, they have many samples, which
they exchange with each other. Also, the data might also
vary (e.g., a road might be reported as jammed, but a few
minutes later it could be free), thus making it harder to
decide whether to trust the agent, who sent the data. 
Moreover, the agent might lie only about a subset of its samples,
thus making it even harder to detect his cheating.
Some work has been done in the context of gossip networks
or transportation networks regarding the spreading of data
and its dissemination.
Datta et al. [4] focus on information dissemination in
mobile ad-hoc networks (MANET). They propose an 
autonomous gossiping algorithm for an infrastructure-less 
mobile ad-hoc networking environment. Their autonomous 
gossiping algorithm uses a greedy mechanism to spread data
items in the network. The data items are spread to 
immediate neighbors that are interested in the information, and
avoid ones that are not interested. The decision which node
is interested in the information is made by the data item
itself, using heuristics. However, their work concentrates on
the movement of the data itself, and not on the agents who
propagate the data. This is different from our scenario in
which each agent maintains the data it has gathered, while
the agent itself roams the road and is responsible (and has
the capabilities) for spreading the data to other agents in
the network.
Das et al. [3] propose a cooperative strategy for content
delivery in vehicular networks. In their domain, peers 
download a file from a mesh and exchange pieces of the file among
themselves. We, on the other hand, are interested in 
vehicular networks in which there is no rule forcing the agents to
cooperate among themselves.
Shibata et al. [16] propose a method for cars to 
cooperatively and autonomously collect traffic jam statistics to
estimate arrival time to destinations for each car. The 
communication is based on IEEE 802.11, without using a fixed
infrastructure on the ground. While we use the same 
domain, we focus on a different problem. Shibata et al. [16]
mainly focus on efficiently broadcasting the data between
agents (e.g., avoid duplicates and communication overhead),
as we focus on the case where agents are not cooperative in
328 The Sixth Intl. Joint Conf. on Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (AAMAS 07)
nature, and on how selfish agents affect other agents and the
network load.
Wang et al. [17] also assert, in the context of wireless 
networks, that individual agents are likely to do what is most
beneficial for their owners, and will act selfishly. They design
a protocol for communication in networks in which all agents
are selfish. Their protocol motivates every agent to 
maximize its profit only when it behaves truthfully (a mechanism
of incentive compatibility). However, the domain of wireless
networks is quite different from the domain of 
transportation networks. In the wireless network, the wireless terminal
is required to contribute its local resources to transmit data.
Thus, Wang et al. [17] use a payment mechanism, which 
attaches costs to terminals when transmitting data, and thus
enables them to maximize their utility when transmitting
data, instead of acting selfishly. Unlike this, in the context
of transportation networks, constructing such a mechanism
is not quite a straightforward task, as self-interested agents
and regular gossip agents might incur the same cost when
transmitting data. The difference between the two types of
agents only exists regarding the credibility of the data they
exchange.
In the next section, we will describe our transportation
network model and gossiping between the agents. We will
also describe the different agents in our system.
3. MODEL AND SIMULATIONS
We first describe the formal transportation network model,
and then we describe the simulations designs.
3.1 Formal Model
Following Shavitt and Shay [15] and Parshani [13], the
transportation network is represented by a directed graph
G(V, E), where V is the set of vertices representing 
junctions, and E is the set of edges, representing roads. An edge
e ∈ E is associated with a weight w > 0, which specifies
the time it takes to traverse the road associated with that
edge. The roads" weights vary in time according to the 
network (traffic) load. Each car, which is associated with an
autonomous agent, is given a pair of origin and destination
points (vertices). A journey is defined as the (not 
necessarily simple) path taken by an agent between the origin vertex
and the destination vertex. We assume that there is always
a path between a source and a destination. A journey length
is defined as the sum of all weights of the edges constituting
this path. Every agent has to travel between its origin and
destination points and aims to minimize its journey length.
Initially, agents are ignorant about the state of the roads.
Regular agents are only capable of gathering information
about the roads as they traverse them. However, we assume
that some agents have means of inter-vehicle 
communication (e.g., IEEE 802.11) with a given communication range,
which enables them to communicate with other agents with
the same device. Those agents are referred to as gossip
agents. Since the communication range is limited, the 
exchange of information using gossiping is done in one of two
ways: (a) between gossip agents passing one another, or (b)
between gossip agents located at the same junction. We 
assume that each agent stores the most recent information it
has received or gathered around the edges in the network.
A subset of the gossip agents are those agents who are 
selfinterested and manipulate the devices for their own benefit.
We will refer to these agents as self-interested agents. A
detailed description of their behavior is given in Sections 4
and 5.
3.2 Simulation Design
Building on [13], the network in our simulations replicates
a central part of a large city, and consists of 50 junctions
and 150 roads, which are approximately the number of main
streets in the city. Each simulation consists of 6 iterations.
The basic time unit of the iteration is a step, which 
equivalents to about 30 seconds. Each iteration simulates six hours
of movements. The average number of cars passing through
the network during the iteration is about 70,000 and the 
average number of cars in the network at a specific time unit
is about 3,500 cars. In each iteration the same agents are
used with the same origin and destination points, whereas
the data collected in earlier iterations is preserved in the
future iterations (referred to as the history of the agent).
This allows us to simulate somewhat a daily routine in the
transportation network (e.g., a working week).
Each of the experiments that we describe below is run
with 5 different traffic scenarios. Each such traffic scenario
differs from one another by the initial load of the roads and
the designated routes of the agents (cars) in the network.
For each such scenario 5 simulations are run, creating a total
of 25 simulations for each experiment.
It has been shown by Parshani et al. [13, 14] that the 
information propagation in the network is very efficient when
the percentage of gossiping agents is 10% or more. Yet, due
to congestion caused by too many cars rushing to what is
reported as the less congested part of the network 20-30%
of gossiping agents leads to the most efficient routing results
in their experiments. Thus, in our simulation, we focus only
on simulations in which the percentage of gossip agents is
20%.
The simulations were done with different percentages of
self-interested agents. To gain statistical significance we ran
each simulation with changes in the set of the gossip agents,
and the set of the self-interested agents.
In order to gain a similar ordinal scale, the results were
normalized. The normalized values were calculated by 
comparing each agent"s result to his results when the same 
scenario was run with no self-interested agents. This was done
for all of the iterations. Using the normalized values enabled
us to see how worse (or better) each agent would perform
compared to the basic setting. For example, if an average
journey length of a certain agent in iteration 1 with no 
selfinterested agent was 50, and the length was 60 in the same
scenario and iteration in which self-interested agents were
involved, then the normalized value for that agent would be
60/50 = 1.2.
More details regarding the simulations are described in
Sections 4 and 5.
4. SPREADING LIES, MAXIMIZING 
UTILITY
In the first set of experiments we investigated the benefits
achieved by the self-interested agents, whose aim was to 
minimize their own journey length. The self-interested agents
adopted a cheating approach, in which they sent false data
to their peers.
In this section we first describe the simulations with the
self-interested agents. Then, we model the scenario as a
The Sixth Intl. Joint Conf. on Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (AAMAS 07) 329
game with two types of agents, and prove that the 
equilibrium result can only be achieved when there is no efficient
exchange of gossiping information in the network.
4.1 Modeling the Self-Interested Agents" 
Behavior
While the gossip agents gather data and send it to other
agents, the self-interested agents" behavior is modeled as
follows:
1. Calculate the shortest path from origin to destination.
2. Communicate the following data to other agents:
(a) If the road is not in the agent"s route - send the
true data about it (e.g., data about roads it has
received from other agents)
(b) For all roads in the agent"s route, which the agent
has not yet traversed, send a random high weight.
Basically, the self-interested agent acts the same as the 
gossip agent. It collects data regarding the weight of the roads
(either by traversing the road or by getting the data from
other agents) and sends the data it has collected to other
agents. However, the self-interested agent acts differently
when the road is in its route. Since the agent"s goal is to
reach its destination as fast as possible, the agent will falsely
report that all the roads in its route are heavily congested.
This is in order to free the path for itself, by making other
agents recalculate their paths, this time without including
roads on the self-interested agent"s route. To this end, for
all the roads in its route, which the agent has not yet passed,
the agent generates a random weight, which is above the 
average weight of the roads in the network. It then associates
these new weights with the roads in its route and sends them
to the other agents.
While an agent can also divert cars from its route by
falsely reporting congested roads in parallel to its route as
free, this behavior is not very likely since other agents, 
attempting to use the roads, will find the mistake within a
short time and spread the true congestion on the road. On
the other hand, if an agent manages to persuade other agents
not to use a road, it will be harder for them to detect that
the said roads are not congested.
In addition, to avoid being influenced by its own lies and
other lies spreading in the network, all self-interested agents
will ignore data received about roads with heavy traffic (note
that data about roads that are not heavily traffic will not
be ignored)1
.
In the next subsection we describe the simulation results,
involving the self-interested agents.
4.2 Simulation Results
To test the benefits of cheating by the self-interested agents
we ran several experiments. In the first set of experiments,
we created a scenario, in which a small group of self-interested
agents spread lies on the same route, and tested its 
effect on the journey length of all the agents in the network.
1
In other simulations we have run, in which there had been
several real congestions in the network, we indeed saw that
even when the roads are jammed, the self-interested agents
were less affected if they ignored all reported heavy traffic,
since by such they also discarded all lies roaming the network
Table 1: Normalized journey length values, 
selfinterested agents with the same route
Iteration Self-Interested Gossip - Gossip - Regular
Number Agents SR Others Agents
1 1.38 1.27 1.06 1.06
2 0.95 1.56 1.18 1.14
3 1.00 1.86 1.28 1.17
4 1.06 2.93 1.35 1.16
5 1.13 2.00 1.40 1.17
6 1.08 2.02 1.43 1.18
Thus, several cars, which had the same origin and 
destination points, were designated as self-interested agents. In this
simulation, we selected only 6 agents to be part of the group
of the self-interested agents, as we wanted to investigate the
effect achieved by only a small number of agents.
In each simulation in this experiment, 6 different agents
were randomly chosen to be part of the group of self-interested
agents, as described above. In addition, one road, on the
route of these agents, was randomly selected to be partially
blocked, letting only one car go through that road at each
time step. About 8,000 agents were randomly selected as
regular gossip agents, and the other 32,000 agents were 
designated as regular agents.
We analyzed the average journey length of the self-interested
agents as opposed to the average journey length of other
regular gossip agents traveling along the same route. Table
1 summarizes the normalized results for the self-interested
agents, the gossip agents (those having the same origin and
destination points as the self-interested agents, denoted 
Gossip - SR, and all other gossip agents, denoted Gossip - 
Others) and the regular agents, as a function of the iteration
number.
We can see from the results that the first time the 
selfinterested agents traveled the route while spreading the false
data about the roads did not help them (using the paired
t-test we show that those agents had significantly lower 
journey lengths in the scenario in which they did not spread any
lies, with p < 0.01). This is mainly due to the fact that
the lies do not bypass the self-interested agent and reach
other cars that are ahead of the self-interested car on the
same route. Thus, spreading the lies in the first iteration
does not help the self-interested agent to free the route he
is about to travel, in the first iteration.
Only when the self-interested agents had repeated their
journey in the next iteration (iteration 2) did it help them
significantly (p = 0.04). The reason for this is that other 
gossip agents received this data and used it to recalculate their
shortest path, thus avoiding entrance to the roads, for which
the self-interested agents had spread false information about
congestion. It is also interesting to note the large value
attained by the self-interested agents in the first iteration.
This is mainly due to several self-interested agents, who 
entered the jammed road. This situation occurred since the
self-interested agents ignored all heavy traffic data, and thus
ignored the fact that the road was jammed. As they started
spreading lies about this road, more cars shifted from this
route, thus making the road free for the future iterations.
However, we also recall that the self-interested agents 
ignore all information about the heavy traffic roads. Thus,
330 The Sixth Intl. Joint Conf. on Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (AAMAS 07)
Table 2: Normalized journey length values, 
spreading lies for a beneficiary agent
Iteration Beneficiary Gossip - Gossip - Regular
Number Agent SR Others Agents
1 1.10 1.05 0.94 1.11
2 1.09 1.14 0.99 1.14
3 1.04 1.19 1.02 1.14
4 1.03 1.26 1.03 1.14
5 1.05 1.32 1.05 1.12
6 0.92 1.40 1.06 1.11
when the network becomes congested, more self-interested
cars are affected, since they might enter jammed roads,
which they would otherwise not have entered. This can be
seen, for example, in iterations 4-6, in which the normalized
value of the self-interested agents increased above 1.00. 
Using the paired t-test to compare these values with the values
achieved by these agents when no lies are used, we see that
there is no significant difference between the two scenarios.
As opposed to the gossip agents, we can see how little
effect the self-interested agents have on the regular agents.
As compared to the gossip agents on the same route that
have traveled as much as 193% more, when self-interested
agents are introduced, the average journey length for the
regular agents has only increased by about 15%. This result
is even lower than the effect on other gossip agents in the
entire network.
Since we noticed that cheating by the self-interested agents
does not benefit them in the first iteration, we devised 
another set of experiments. In the second set of experiments,
the self-interested agents have the objective to help another
agent, who is supposed to enter the network some time 
after the self-interested agent entered. We refer to the latter
agent as the beneficiary agent. Just like a self-interested
agent, the beneficiary agent also ignores all data regarding
heavy traffic. In real-life this can be modeled, for 
example, by a husband, who would like to help his wife find a
faster route to her destination. Table 2 summarizes the 
normalized values for the different agents. As in the first set
of experiments, 5 simulations were run for each scenario,
with a total of 25 simulations. In each of these simulation
one agent was randomly selected as a self-interested agent,
and then another agent, with the same origin as the 
selfinterested agent, was randomly selected as the beneficiary
agent. The other 8,000 and 32,000 agents were designated
as regular gossip agents and regular agents, respectively.
We can see that as the number of iterations advances, the
lower the normalized value for the beneficiary agent. In this
scenario, just like the previous one, in the first iterations,
not only does the beneficiary agent not avoid the jammed
roads, since he ignores all heavy traffic, he also does not
benefit from the lies spread by the self-interested agent. This
is due to the fact that the lies are not yet incorporated by
other gossip agents. Thus, if we compare the average journey
length in the first iteration when lies are spread and when
there are no lies, the average is significantly lower when there
are no lies (p < 0.03). On the other hand, if we compare
the average journey length in all of the iterations, there is
no significant difference between the two settings. Still, in
most of the iterations, the average journey length of the
beneficiary agent is longer than in the case when no lies are
spread.
We can also see the impact on the other agents in the
system. While the gossip agents, which are not on the
route of the beneficiary agent, virtually are not affected by
the self-interested agent, those on the route and the 
regular agents are affected and have higher normalized values.
That is, even with just one self-interested car, we can see
that both the gossip agents that follow the same route as
the lies spread by the self-interested agents, and other 
regular agents, increase their journey length by more than 14%.
In our third set of experiments we examined a setting in
which there was an increasing number of agents, and the
agents did not necessarily have the same origin and 
destination points. To model this we randomly selected 
selfinterested agents, whose objective was to minimize their
average journey length, assuming the cars were repeating
their journeys (that is, more than one iteration was made).
As opposed to the first set of experiments, in this set the
self-interested agents were selected randomly, and we did
not enforce the constraint that they will all have the same
origin and destination points.
As in the previous sets of experiments we ran 5 
different simulations per scenario. In each simulation 11 runs
were made, each run with different numbers of self-interested
agents: 0 (no self-interested agents), 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16. Each
agent adopted the behavior modeled in Section 4.1. Figure
1 shows the normalized value achieved by the self-interested
agents as a function of their number. The figure shows these
values for iterations 2-6. The first iteration is not shown 
intentionally, as we assume repeated journeys. Also, we have
seen in the previous set of experiments and we have 
provided explanations as to why the self-interested agents do
not gain much from their behavior in the first iteration.
0.955
0.96
0.965
0.97
0.975
0.98
0.985
0.99
0.995
1
1.005
1.01
1.015
1.02
1.025
1.03
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10111213141516
Self-Interested Agents Number
NormalizedValue
Iteration 2 Iteration 3 Iteration 4
Iteration 5 Iteration 6
Figure 1: Self-interested agents normalized values as
a function of the number of self-interested agents.
Using these simulations we examined what the threshold
could be for the number of randomly selected self-interested
agents in order to allow themselves to benefit from their
selfish behavior. We can see that up to 8 self-interested
agents, the average normalized value is below 1. That is,
they benefit from their malicious behavior. In the case of
one self-interested agent there is a significant difference 
between the average journey length of when the agent spread
lies and when no lies are spread (p < 0.001), while when
The Sixth Intl. Joint Conf. on Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (AAMAS 07) 331
there are 2, 4, 8 and 16 self-interested agents there is no
significance difference. Yet, as the number of self-interested
agents increases, the normalized value also increases. In
such cases, the normalized value is larger than 1, and the
self-interested agents journey length becomes significantly
higher than their journey length, in cases where there are
no self-interested agents in the system.
In the next subsection we analyze the scenario as a game
and show that when in equilibrium the exchange of gossiping
between the agents becomes inefficient.
4.3 When Gossiping is Inefficient
We continued and modeled our scenario as a game, in 
order to find the equilibrium. There are two possible types for
the agents: (a) regular gossip agents, and (b) self-interested
agents. Each of these agents is a representative of its group,
and thus all agents in the same group have similar behavior.
We note that the advantage of using gossiping in 
transportation networks is to allow the agents to detect anomalies
in the network (e.g., traffic jams) and to quickly adapt to
them by recalculating their routes [14]. We also assume that
the objective of the self-interested agents is to minimize their
own journey length, thus they spread lies on their routes, as
described in Section 4.1. We also assume that sophisticated
methods for identifying the self-interested agents or 
managing reputation are not used. This is mainly due to the 
complexity of incorporating and maintaining such mechanisms,
as well as due to the dynamics of the network, in which 
interactions between different agents are frequent, agents may
leave the network, and data about the road might change as
time progresses (e.g., a road might be reported by a regular
gossip agent as free at a given time, yet it may currently be
jammed due to heavy traffic on the road).
Let Tavg be the average time it takes to traverse an edge
in the transportation network (that is, the average load of
an edge). Let Tmax be the maximum time it takes to 
traverse an edge. We will investigate the game, in which the
self-interested and the regular gossip agents can choose the
following actions. The self-interested agents can choose how
much to lie, that is, they can choose to spread how long (not
necessarily the true duration) it takes to traverse certain
roads. Since the objective of the self-interested agents is to
spread messages as though some roads are jammed, the 
traversal time they report is obviously larger than the average
time. We denote the time the self-interested agents spread
as Ts, such that Tavg ≤ Ts ≤ Tmax. Motivated by the 
results of the simulations we have described above, we saw that
the agents are less affected if they discard the heavy traffic
values. Thus, the regular gossip cars, attempting to 
mitigate the effect of the liars, can choose a strategy to ignore
abnormal congestion values above a certain threshold, Tg.
Obviously, Tavg ≤ Tg ≤ Tmax. In order to prevent the 
gossip agents from detecting the lies and just discarding those
values, the self-interested agents send lies in a given range,
[Ts, Tmax], with an inverse geometric distribution, that is,
the higher the T value, the higher its frequency.
Now we construct the utility functions for each type of
agents, which is defined by the values of Ts and Tg. If the
self-interested agents spread traversal times higher than or
equal to the regular gossip cars" threshold, they will not
benefit from those lies. Thus, the utility value of the 
selfinterested agents in this case is 0. On the other hand, if the
self-interested agents spread traversal time which is lower
than the threshold, they will gain a positive utility value.
From the regular gossip agents point-of-view, if they accept
messages from the self-interested agents, then they 
incorporate the lies in their calculation, thus they will lose utility
points. On the other hand, if they discard the false values
the self-interested agents send, that is, they do not 
incorporate the lies, they will gain utility values. Formally, we use
us
to denote the utility of the self-interested agents and ug
to denote the utility of the regular gossip agents. We also
denote the strategy profile in the game as {Ts, Tg}. The
utility functions are defined as:
us
=
0 if Ts ≥ Tg
Ts − Tavg + 1 if Ts < Tg
(1)
ug
=
Tg − Tavg if Ts ≥ Tg
Ts − Tg if Ts < Tg
(2)
We are interested in finding the Nash equilibrium. We
recall from [12], that the Nash equilibrium is a strategy 
profile, where no player has anything to gain by deviating from
his strategy, given that the other agent follows his strategy
profile. Formally, let (S, u) denote the game, where S is
the set of strategy profiles and u is the set of utility 
functions. When each agent i ∈ {regular gossip, self-interested}
chooses a strategy Ti resulting in a strategy profile T =
(Ts, Tg) then agent i obtains a utility of ui
(T). A strategy
profile T∗
∈ S is a Nash equilibrium if no deviation in the
strategy by any single agent is profitable, that is, if for all i,
ui
(T∗
) ≥ ui
(Ti, T∗
−i). That is, (Ts, Tg) is a Nash equilibrium
if the self-interested agents have no other value Ts such that
us
(Ts, Tg) > us
(Ts, Tg), and similarly for the gossip agents.
We now have the following theorem.
Theorem 4.1. (Tavg, Tavg) is the only Nash equilibrium.
Proof. First we will show that (Tavg, Tavg) is a Nash 
equilibrium. Assume, by contradiction, that the gossip agents
choose another value Tg > Tavg. Thus, ug
(Tavg, Tg ) =
Tavg − Tg < 0. On the other hand, ug
(Tavg, Tavg) = 0.
Thus, the regular gossip agents have no incentive to 
deviate from this strategy. The self-interested agents also have
no incentive to deviate from this strategy. By 
contradiction, again assume that the self-interested agents choose
another value Ts > Tavg. Thus, us
(Ts , Tavg) = 0, while
us
(Tavg, Tavg) = 0.
We will now show that the above solution is unique. We
will show that any other tuple (Ts, Tg), such that Tavg <
Tg ≤ Tmax and Tavg < Ts ≤ Tmax is not a Nash equilibrium.
We have three cases. In the first Tavg < Tg < Ts ≤ Tmax.
Thus, us
(Ts, Tg) = 0 and ug
(Ts, Tg) = Tg − Tavg. In this
case, the regular gossip agents have an incentive to deviate
and choose another strategy Tg + 1, since by doing so they
increase their own utility: ug
(Ts, Tg + 1) = Tg + 1 − Tavg.
In the second case we have Tavg < Ts < Tg ≤ Tmax. Thus,
ug
(Ts, Tg) = Ts − Tg < 0. Also, the regular gossip agents
have an incentive to deviate and choose another strategy
Tg −1, in which their utility value is higher: ug
(Ts, Tg −1) =
Ts − Tg + 1.
In the last case we have Tavg < Ts = Tg ≤ Tmax. Thus,
us
(Ts, Tg) = Ts − Tg = 0. In this case, the self-interested
agents have an incentive to deviate and choose another 
strategy Tg − 1, in which their utility value is higher: us
(Tg −
1, Tg) = Tg − 1 − Tavg + 1 = Tg − Tavg > 0.
332 The Sixth Intl. Joint Conf. on Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (AAMAS 07)
Table 3: Normalized journey length values for the
first iteration
Self-Interested Self-Interested Gossip Regular
Agents Number Agents Agents Agents
1 0.98 1.01 1.05
2 1.09 1.02 1.05
4 1.07 1.02 1.05
8 1.06 1.04 1.05
16 1.03 1.08 1.06
32 1.07 1.17 1.08
50 1.12 1.28 1.1
64 1.14 1.4 1.13
80 1.15 1.5 1.14
100 1.17 1.63 1.16
Table 4: Normalized journey length values for all
iterations
Self-Interested Self-Interested Gossip Regular
Agents Number Agents Agents Agents
1 0.98 1.02 1.06
2 1.0 1.04 1.07
4 1.0 1.08 1.07
8 1.01 1.33 1.11
16 1.02 1.89 1.17
32 1.06 2.46 1.25
50 1.13 2.24 1.29
64 1.21 2.2 1.32
80 1.21 2.13 1.27
100 1.26 2.11 1.27
The above theorem proves that the equilibrium point is
reached only when the self-interested agents send the time
to traverse certain edges equals the average time, and on
the other hand the regular gossip agents discard all data 
regarding roads that are associated with an average time or
higher. Thus, for this equilibrium point the exchange of 
gossiping information between agents is inefficient, as the gossip
agents are unable to detect any anomalies in the network.
In the next section we describe another scenario for the
self-interested agents, in which they are not concerned with
their own utility, but rather interested in maximizing the
average journey length of other gossip agents.
5. SPREADING LIES, CAUSING CHAOS
Another possible behavior that can be adopted by 
selfinterested agents is characterized by their goal to cause 
disorder in the network. This can be achieved, for example, by
maximizing the average journey length of all agents, even at
the cost of maximizing their own journey length.
To understand the vulnerability of the gossip based 
transportation support system, we ran 5 different simulations for
each scenario. In each simulation different agents were 
randomly chosen (using a uniform distribution) to act as 
gossip agents, among them self-interested agents were chosen.
Each self-interested agent behaved in the same manner as
described in Section 4.1.
Every simulation consisted of 11 runs with each run 
comprising different numbers of self-interested agents: 0 (no 
selfinterested agents), 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 50, 64, 80 and 100.
Also, in each run the number of self-interested agents was
increased incrementally. For example: the run with 50 
selfinterested agents consisted of all the self-interested agents
that were used in the run with 32 self-interested agents, but
with an additional 18 self-interested agents.
Tables 3 and 4 summarize the normalized journey length
for the self-interested agents, the regular gossip agents and
the regular (non-gossip) agents. Table 3 summarizes the
data for the first iteration and Table 4 summarizes the data
for the average of all iterations. Figure 2 demonstrates
the changes in the normalized values for the regular gossip
agents and the regular agents, as a function of the iteration
number. Similar to the results in our first set of experiments,
described in Section 4.2, we can see that randomly selected
self-interested agents who follow different randomly selected
routes do not benefit from their malicious behavior (that is,
their average journey length does not decrease). However,
when only one self-interested agent is involved, it does 
benefit from the malicious behavior, even in the first iteration.
The results also indicate that the regular gossip agents are
more sensitive to malicious behavior than regular 
agentsthe average journey length for the gossip agents increases
significantly (e.g., with 32 self-interested agents the average
journey length for the gossip agents was 146% higher than
in the setting with no self-interested agents at all, as 
opposed to an increase of only 25% for the regular agents). In
contrast, these results also indicate that the self-interested
agents do not succeed in causing a significant load in the
network by their malicious behavior.
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
1 2 3 4 5 6
Iteration Number
NormalizedValue
32 self-interested agents, gossip agents normalized value
100 self-interested agents, gossip agents normalized value
32 self-interested agents, regular agents normalized value
100 self-interested agents, regular agents normalized value
Figure 2: Gossip and regular agents normalized 
values, as a function of the iteration.
Since the goal of the self-interested agents in this case is
to cause disorder in the network rather than use the lies for
their own benefits, the question arises as to why would the
behavior of the self-interested agents be to send lies about
their routes only. Furthermore, we hypothesize that if they
all send lies about the same major roads the damage they
might inflict on the entire network would be larger that had
each of them sent lies about its own route. To examine this
hypothesis, we designed another set of experiments. In this
set of experiments, all the self-interested agents spread lies
about the same 13 main roads in the network. However, the
results show quite a smaller impact on other gossip and 
reguThe Sixth Intl. Joint Conf. on Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (AAMAS 07) 333
Table 5: Normalized journey length values for all
iterations. Network with congestions.
Self-Interested Self-Interested Gossip Regular
Agents Number Agents Agents Agents
1 1.04 1.02 1.22
2 1.06 1.04 1.22
4 1.04 1.06 1.23
8 1.07 1.15 1.26
16 1.09 1.55 1.39
32 1.12 2.25 1.56
50 1.24 2.25 1.60
64 1.28 2.47 1.63
80 1.50 2.41 1.64
100 1.69 2.61 1.75
lar agents in the network. The average normalized value for
the gossip agents in these simulations was only about 1.07,
as opposed to 1.7 in the original scenario. When analyzing
the results we saw that although the false data was spread,
it did not cause other gossip cars to change their route. The
main reason was that the lies were spread on roads that were
not on the route of the self-interested agents. Thus, it took
the data longer to reach agents on the main roads, and when
the agents reached the relevant roads this data was too old
to be incorporated in the other agents calculations.
We also examined the impact of sending lies in order to
cause chaos when there are already congestions in the 
network. To this end, we simulated a network in which 13 main
roads are jammed. The behavior of the self-interested agents
is as described in Section 4.1, and the self-interested agents
spread lies about their own route. The simulation results,
detailed in Table 5, show that there is a greater incentive
for the self-interested agents to cheat when the network is
already congested, as their cheating causes more damage
to the other agents in the network. For example, whereas
the average journey length of the regular agents increased
only by about 15% in the original scenario, in which the 
network was not congested, in this scenario the average journey
length of the agents had increased by about 60%.
6. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper we investigated the benefits achieved by
self-interested agents in vehicular networks. Using 
simulations we investigated two behaviors that might be taken
by self-interested agents: (a) trying to minimize their 
journey length, and (b) trying to cause chaos in the network.
Our simulations indicate that in both behaviors the 
selfinterested agents have only limited success achieving their
goal, even if no counter-measures are taken. This is in 
contrast to the greater impact inflicted by self-interested agents
in other domains (e.g., E-Commerce). Some reasons for this
are the special characteristics of vehicular networks and their
dynamic nature. While the self-interested agents spread lies,
they cannot choose which agents with whom they will 
interact. Also, by the time their lies reach other agents, they
might become irrelevant, as more recent data has reached
the same agents.
Motivated by the simulation results, future research in
this field will focus on modeling different behaviors of the
self-interested agents, which might cause more damage to
the network. Another research direction would be to find
ways of minimizing the effect of selfish-agents by using 
distributed reputation or other measures.
7. REFERENCES
[1] A. Bejan and R. Lawrence. Peer-to-peer cooperative
driving. In Proceedings of ISCIS, pages 259-264,
Orlando, USA, October 2002.
[2] I. Chisalita and N. Shahmehri. A novel architecture for
supporting vehicular communication. In Proceedings of
VTC, pages 1002-1006, Canada, September 2002.
[3] S. Das, A. Nandan, and G. Pau. Spawn: A swarming
protocol for vehicular ad-hoc wireless networks. In
Proceedings of VANET, pages 93-94, 2004.
[4] A. Datta, S. Quarteroni, and K. Aberer. Autonomous
gossiping: A self-organizing epidemic algorithm for
selective information dissemination in mobile ad-hoc
networks. In Proceedings of IC-SNW, pages 126-143,
Maison des Polytechniciens, Paris, France, June 2004.
[5] D. Dolev, R. Reischuk, and H. R. Strong. Early
stopping in byzantine agreement. JACM,
37(4):720-741, 1990.
[6] GM. Threat assessment algorithm.
http://www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/research/pub/
acas/acas-fieldtest/, 2000.
[7] Honda.
http://world.honda.com/news/2005/c050902.html.
[8] Lamport, Shostak, and Pease. The byzantine generals
problem. In Advances in Ultra-Dependable Distributed
Systems, N. Suri, C. J. Walter, and M. M. Hugue
(Eds.). IEEE Computer Society Press, 1982.
[9] C. Leckie and R. Kotagiri. Policies for sharing
distributed probabilistic beliefs. In Proceedings of
ACSC, pages 285-290, Adelaide, Australia, 2003.
[10] D. Malkhi, E. Pavlov, and Y. Sella. Gossip with
malicious parties. Technical report: 2003-9, School of
Computer Science and Engineering - The Hebrew
University of Jerusalem, Israel, March 2003.
[11] Y. M. Minsky and F. B. Schneider. Tolerating
malicious gossip. Distributed Computing, 16(1):49-68,
February 2003.
[12] M. J. Osborne and A. Rubinstein. A Course In Game
Theory. MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 1994.
[13] R. Parshani. Routing in gossip networks. Master"s
thesis, Department of Computer Science, Bar-Ilan
University, Ramat-Gan, Israel, October 2004.
[14] R. Parshani, S. Kraus, and Y. Shavitt. A study of
gossiping in transportation networks. Submitted for
publication, 2006.
[15] Y. Shavitt and A. Shay. Optimal routing in gossip
networks. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, 54(4):1473-1487, July 2005.
[16] N. Shibata, T. Terauchi, T. Kitani, K. Yasumoto,
M. Ito, and T. Higashino. A method for sharing traffic
jam information using inter-vehicle communication. In
Proceedings of V2VCOM, USA, 2006.
[17] W. Wang, X.-Y. Li, and Y. Wang. Truthful multicast
routing in selfish wireless networks. In Proceedings of
MobiCom, pages 245-259, USA, 2004.
[18] B. Yu and M. P. Singh. A social mechanism of
reputation management in electronic communities. In
Proceedings of CIA, 2000.
334 The Sixth Intl. Joint Conf. on Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (AAMAS 07)
